Yeah, that's
Alright. Here we go.
Um,
and if we can invite our going on second er,
um, we're going to our second submitter.
There's an awful echo there. Okay, thank you.
But where are we starting, my friend? Thanks.
We're starting off at the second, um, submitter,
which is the Institute of Economic Affairs, the IEA, just
for members reference where there is not a paper attached,
um, to the agenda item.
It's because it's a submitter that we've invited, um, to,
to speak to us that didn't submit such
as the Institute of Economic Affairs above
second up on the agenda, but are actually going first.
But the first one is not available at the moment or what?
We're just waiting. Waiting, yeah. Oh yeah. Okay.
Can you, can you see the institute online?
Yeah, they are. Yeah. So
Matthew Le they're coming online.
Great.
Here we go. Um, welcome Matthew.
Uh, thanks for joining us this morning.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, um,
including any time for questions.
So over to you.
Um, thank, thank you very much for, for having me.
Um, uh, it's, it's a pleasure to be, have this invitation
to, to speak about what is obviously a very important issue.
I guess I just wanted to start off by, um, saying something
that you don't often hear in the debate,
but is actually something positive about the internet
and about the power of the digital world to connect people,
um, to allow us to update with friends
and family to find pretty much any piece
of information at our fingertips,
fingertips you could possibly imagine.
Um, mean obviously learn from each other.
This is what we're doing here today.
And I think the debate, um, in, in this topic is often, um,
effectively negative and,
and often dismisses some of the positives that come internet
and, and in the process can lead
to excessively um, uh, outcomes.
Um, I, I, I think I,
I just wanna make I think four points I'll try
to be brief about, and then very keen, um, uh, to answer any
of the, the questions that you have.
Uh, for background, I've, um, at affairs, uh,
as a public policy fellow where I was involved
with debates about beyond my Safety Act in the uk.
Um, I'm also a, a consultant at a,
at a consulting called Freshwater Strategy, um,
which I work for in the uk.
Um, uh, so I'm, I'm gonna make, uh, the, the, the,
a few points I think are, are relevant to
what New Zealand's considering.
Um, the, the first point to make is, um, when it comes
to UK's online Safety Act,
there is not evidence at this point
that the ACT has made anyone safer.
Um, and I think that's an important point
for an opportunity, a country like New Zealand to learn from
and see how the act actually plays out in practice.
'cause we know that there have been several unintended
consequences from the act.
We know there's been a significant increase in VPN usage,
which means the riskiest people are going to darker, um,
and unregulated platforms.
Um, we know when it comes, for example, to adult websites,
um, that there's been a doubling
or even tripling of traffic to, um, platforms
that haven't implemented a application requirements.
That means the act in itself is not working.
But for those who do follow the rules are facing quite
significant risks to their privacy.
Um, and then also on top of that, we know from the,
the way the ACT operating,
we've seen on platforms like x hiding a protests, uh, videos
of protests outside asylum hotels.
We've seen material from Gaza
and Ukraine also hidden by default.
Um, we saw even a speech by a,
a conservative parliamentarian in the uk, KLA,
about the failed states failed response
to rate gangs also hidden from view
by default in the name of protecting children.
But of course, that that means everyone has
to verify their age and,
and risk, um, their,
their potential privacy in order to access that content.
So that's the first point I make, which is there is really
lack of, it's a positive impact so far in the UK in terms
of child safety, and we know
that there have been unintended consequences.
Um, the second point I wanna make is this question about the
duty of care model itself.
Um, I think the, the premise of the, it,
it sounds good in theory where we have a, a duty of care
to protect someone, but this kind of framework, it, it,
it treats speech as if it's a tripping hazard.
It's an idea for health and safety law, um,
which is a model designed to prevent physical injury,
and it's not necessarily designed to regulate expression.
Um, I think technology lawyer Grain Smith observed best when
he said speech is not a tripping hazard.
Um, in honorary taught law, a duty
of care is about preventing foreseeable physical harm,
the sort of harm that can be objectively verified, such
as someone slipping on a wet floor.
When you transpose that idea of, um,
into the online safe online world, um, it, it asks
to prevent psychological harm,
a subjective harm from exposure to speech.
Um, and that requires a lot of subjective, um,
interpretation, uh, by,
by platforms when you create that GF care model.
Um, and it turns platforms into proactive monitors and,
and sensors of speech, um, especially in the UK context
where they've set the threshold of removals quite low.
The, the basis on which
to remove speech is anything they reasonably have reasonable
grounds to infer could be illegal.
Um, and, and that is basically asking for a,
a quite significant amounts of content
to be removed from platforms, even if it might be
otherwise considered legal, especially when you can combine
that in the act with quite significant fines.
So think structurally, the, the due, um, duty
of care model has been, been unthought.
I think that's my second point. Um,
the third point is about this under 16 ban, uh,
for social media, which has been obviously been something
that the austral government's trying to legislate
for has been talked about in the UK as well.
Um, I think that builds from a, a false premise, um,
that assumes online materials inherently harmful, um,
and ignores many of the benefits of the internet
to young people from maintaining friendship, friendships,
accessing information, um, it criminal,
potentially criminalizes access to online material and,
and does a lot of harm to people on just extent.
I think really, and this feeds into my final point here
that I, I want to make, which is, I think we need
to be more creative than these very top heavy solutions when
it comes to dealing with the, the,
the challenges we face online.
Um, I think efforts to address online harm should focus on
empowering and resourcing law enforcement
to tackle criminal behavior,
particularly using existing laws rather than creating new
sweeping regulatory regimes.
I think it's insur important that police
and prosecutors have the necessary technical capabilities
to go after actual predators and those who commit offenses.
Um, I, I, and I don't have a, a specific understanding
of New Zealand law, but, um,
my understanding other jurisdictions is that any law
that applies offline should also apply online.
It's just about ensuring the enforcement of that law.
The problem with these other models is it's not about
enforcement of the law, it's about creating
different regulatory regimes.
Um, and I also think it's important when it comes
to things like, um, parents
and children to not create a false sense
of security through these laws.
Um, when, when what, it's actually a more
difficult task to education.
Digital literacy, effective safety tools,
and empowering parents, empowering children to be able
to make their own decisions online, um, as well as going
after the predators and, and negative behavior.
So I think I'll leave my opening remarks there,
and I'm be interested, um, thi any questions that you have.
Thank you, Matthew. Uh, first questions from Palm Palmer.
Uh, thanks, Matthew. You mentioned, uh,
since the implementation of the Online Safety Act in uk, uh,
there has been increase in VPN usage.
Uh, how significant is this ha I mean, to ensure
that there is a relation, direct relation between the two,
can you, uh, provide a bit more information so
that we're assured that it's a better correlation?
Yeah, I mean, in the days, so, so in, in July
of this year, the, um,
provisions within the Animal Safety Act that related to, uh,
protecting children from harm as well as provisions related
to preventing children from accessing
adult websites came into force.
Um, the day and,
and the days following that coming into force, there was a,
um, up to 1400% increase in downloads
of some VPNs, um, in the uk.
And that there, I'm, I'm not a, I'm not a v VPN provider,
and I, I can, I can provide you some evidence offline,
if you like, that that certainly shows that it was,
it was in the days following the introduction of those, um,
rules that, that there was a, a significant increase in,
in VPN usage.
Um, and I, I suspect as well
to look at there would be a sustained increase as well.
But, um, I, I can provide evidence on
that if, if that's something of interest.
Thank you. Good, thank you. Question from Vanessa
Wiener. Uh, just can, can
you confirm, uh, what's the timeline, um,
since the rules were changed and introduced?
So you say that there's no evidence of reduction in harm.
What timeframe are we talking?
Well, so the, so the, the very simple provisions
of the Online Safety Act have come into force over the last,
um, I would say 12 months or so.
So there, there've been, um, uh, some
of the early child safety issues came in into force
at, towards the start of this year.
Um, and, and some
of the Asia verification clients said came in in July.
I think the point I'm trying to make there is, there is time
for you to consider the evidence base that comes
through in the UK context to figure out whether
that is the right regulatory response for New Zealand,
um, and other jurisdictions.
Because the honest answer is we don't know whether the
Online Safety Act has worked yet at this point.
Um, and, and I suppose it's that, that it's
that question of the time will tell.
Um, there, there was an early survey suggesting, uh, from,
from off COVID suggesting that children had,
had seen an increased amount
of harmful material in the, in the previous year.
I think that survey was done
before the introduction of the rules.
So it's not necessarily evidence of the rules have failed
yet, but I would, I would say there's no
positive evidence of the rules of,
Okay, so basically it's not that there's, um, evidence
that, um, it hasn't worked, it's just
that there's no evidence that it has
Indeed. I I think that's,
that's, yes.
Ruben Davidson,
Thank you, chair.
Um, so just to clarify too, you,
you've made reference several times to VPNs if everybody
had the same or similar legislation, VPNs would be useless.
Correct?
VPNs would be useless in that scenario,
but I, I would doubt
that every country in the world would introduce the,
the same regime as in, I, as in the, the kind
of online safe regime in the UK context, for example,
would not be lost one in the
First Amendment in the United States.
And I can, I can imagine for the most part, um,
there would be certain parts of the United States
that you could use a VPN to,
but for example, I think there are a lot of jurisdictions
that that wouldn't be inclined to a similar regime,
But the argument could be made that the use
of VPNs just highlights weak regulation in the
countries or in other territories.
Oh, I, I suppose you could say if,
if you think the universal standard is the Online Safety
Act, um, and that that is
what should be introduced everywhere,
I I suppose you could make that argument.
I'm, I'm not sure I would personally make that argument. No,
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, thank you Matthew.
That's all we have time for this morning.
We really appreciate the time you've taken to come
and present to the committee. Thanks
For having me.
Thank you. Uh, so members, we are now going back
to the Free Speech Union.
Um, online we have Dr. Bren Harris.
Hello there, Bryn. Sorry.
Thank you, Bren.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions over to you.
Thank you very much. Uh,
thank you very much for inviting me here.
Uh, it's great to talk to you. So my name is Brynn Harris.
I'm Chief Legal Counsel at the Free Speech Union uk.
Uh, there is also a free speech Union New Zealand,
with whom we are affiliated,
but I'm speaking on behalf of the UK organization.
Um, I'd like to, uh, talk to you similar
to Matthew about the UK's experience
of the Online Safety Act 2023.
Uh, it has been implemented, it's not fully implemented, uh,
but I think the experience, both of its passage
through Parliament and the experience, uh,
of its implementation, uh, would be relevant
for this committee, uh, and should be born in mind.
Uh, the Free Speech Union was actively engaged in the act
as it passed through Parliament in terms of working with,
uh, lawmakers and with government officials.
Um, I'm gonna make, uh, a number of points in the, the time
that I've got and hopefully leave, uh,
will even enough time for questions.
Uh, I have shared a note, um, with Colvin Inglis, uh,
which hopefully could be circulated, uh, just
to give you some background information
on the workings of the act.
So I think the, um, the first, uh,
opening position I would make is the Protecting Children is
beyond any doubt compatible with freedom of speech.
Uh, I don't think any free speech activist, uh, would cavel,
uh, about, uh, films having 15 or 18 certificates.
Uh, so I think that must be the opening principle.
But then the question must be, uh, is regulation, uh,
of the internet the best way to do it?
And specifically, if New Zealand goes down that path,
what disadvantages will arise
or indeed other reasons not to go down that path at all?
First, uh, I think the UK's Online Safety Act, um,
and similar legislation in other countries starts from, uh,
what you might call a conceptual error.
It treats the web, uh, as a discreet,
uh, risk sort of discreet, harmful activity.
Much like owning a firearm is, is a harmful activity
to be regulated or handling hazardous chemicals is,
is a dangerous thing that caused the regulation.
The problem is that the internet isn't like that.
It is a space in which we live our lives
in multifarious ways.
You know, we shop, we chat, we argue, we consume news,
we entertain ourselves, et cetera.
And the problem is that when we start from
that wrong premise, uh, you end up having
what is essentially a law of everything.
'cause the internet is just a place where we live our lives.
So it's, you know, you might as well have, you know, a a law
of being safe indoors or being safe outdoors.
Uh, and the the problem is not just
that there's a certain absurdity to that,
but the problem is that when you regulate that extent
of activity of people's lives,
you are introducing an enormous extent of regulation into
free everyday living.
And I think the committee should consider whether
New Zealand as a liberal democracy is willing to submit
everyday life of its citizens to that degree
of control by law.
Uh, I think as well, if the committee, uh,
or if the New Zealand parliament does introduce this bill,
uh, one thing that's likely
to happen based on the UK experience is that it,
it really does sort of metastasize.
I mean, it gets bigger and bigger
because you realize that to regulate this extent of activity
is enormously complex.
There's a huge amount, uh, that requires, uh, attention,
qualification, et cetera.
Now, one danger with this,
and I think the drawback that we've seen in the uk is
that this is a law that affects everyone.
I realize this is targeted at children,
but it will inevitably harm adults as well,
or affect adults, as Matthew was saying about the overreach
or the excessive take down.
So it's a law that affects everyone, but
'cause it's so complex, uh, you essentially end up
with this really quite rarefied technocratic
impenetrable discussion.
Um, and, and it sort of goes on above people's heads that
that has happened,
and it's continued in the implementation of, uh, the act.
So if you look at the guidance that's produced
by the UK regulator, Ofcom, uh, I mean,
this is essentially a closed discussion between technocrats
and the compliance departments of big tech firms
because the, the volume, the complexity, uh, is enormous.
So you're not gonna get buy-in to this legislation.
It's very difficult to get buy-in
because it is intensely technocratic.
At the same time, it is gonna frustrate people.
It's gonna, it's gonna, you know, impede and, and,
and impose on their everyday life.
So there is a question about legitimacy
and whether people are gonna accept this.
Um, I think another thing to, um, to note is that
because this legislation needs
to regulate an enormous amount of activity,
not just commercial activity, but people's basic activity
day to day, um, there's only so much that an act
of parliament can do.
And inevitably what we've found in, in the UK is that the,
the Online Safety Act delegates an enormous amount of power
to the regulator, um,
because there is this detailed work to do.
Now, the problem with that,
or a problem with that certainly, uh, is that
that regulator has to have discretion.
It's at the coalface. Um, it needs to be able to actually,
you know, operate there at the coalface.
That does empower the regulator a huge amount.
And one problem that we've seen in the UK is that the,
the act is explicitly meant to protect freedom of speech,
but it's very difficult for parliament to sort of materially
impose those values
because the regulator has got so much power
and has to have so much power.
It has to have so much, uh, uh, uh, uh, jurisdiction
that it can be quite hard for you as legislators to say,
we want to make sure these values are protected
because the regulators is gonna have that degree
of, of sway.
Um, I think the last thing I'll say
before, um, questions would really be to back up
what Matthew, uh, was just saying.
Um, increasingly I think we're gonna come
to a reckoning in the uk.
Um, because this act is so easily circumvented by use
of virtual private networks, um, use, um,
of VPNs shot up, uh, 1800% according
to one provider.
Um, the government has said it's looking at it, um,
personally, I think if New Zealand goes ahead with this,
they'll find there's a choice.
Either they have this very onerous,
quite a liberal legislation,
which at the same time is rendered somewhat ineffective
by the ease of circumvention.
Um, and just to add a further answer to the, the question
that Matthew was asked, uh,
online safety will never be universal
because the Americans are not gonna go for it.
So anyone with a VPN connecting
to America is gonna be able to step around this.
So you wanna have an ineffective onerous act,
or you bite the bullet
and you firewall your own country like China does.
Uh, and that is such an invidious choice
that I really think the committee should ask,
are there better ways of doing this
that is not gonna have these disproportionate effects?
I'll leave my opening remarks there,
Bryn, thank you for that. Uh,
I should have actually acknowledged the beginning.
Um, we really appreciate the fact
that this is your late Sunday evening as well, that you're,
uh, meeting with us this morning.
So we do appreciate that. Um,
Reuben Davidson first question.
Thank you. Um, and yeah, acknowledging
that the time difference too.
Um, you mentioned that the regulatory bill in the, in the UK
delegates what you've talk talked about
as an enormous amount of power to the regulator.
Who holds that power currently, if you're not regulated?
Well, it's with com, uh, which was, you know, the office
of communications, a general communications regulator, uh,
and has now been given the online safety brief.
Sorry, if it's not in a regulated context, who holds
that power, that enormous amount of power?
Uh, well, it doesn't
because, uh, it, it is left to, to people to, to do
as they wish to talk, as they wish to interact as they wish.
Now, I suppose you might say that power is
therefore with the hands of large tech companies.
Um, one thing I would say to that, um, I mean,
not everyone likes Elon Musk except,
but, uh, there were a number of people who were
before he took over, were, you know, very disquieted
by the way, in which X
or Twitter as it was then,
was run complaints about the banning of Donald Trump.
Uh, a huge number of take downs of people who had said,
you know, moderately controversial things.
Um, now that has been turned around, uh, X is now, you know,
much better at securing this fundamental right.
We all accept it's a fundamental right to free speech,
and that took place without any legislation,
without any government intervention, uh,
these changes can happen.
It's only a failure of imagination
that thinks change can only come
through state power and legislation.
Thank you. Um, PA Palmer, uh, quick primary,
Very quick. Thank you so much.
So, uh, you mentioned freedom
of expression being compromised.
Can you give us like a general life, uh, example
where we can understand the extent of this compromise?
Yes. So, um, I mean the, the examples
that Matthew gave were very good in the
initial implementation.
Uh, there was very much a kneejerk reaction, uh, to, uh,
removing content that could have been in any way
disturbing to children.
So, as Matthew said, it was, um,
debates in parliament were censored.
Uh, there were some historical websites regarding, you know,
sort of medieval atrocities
and the crusades that was censored.
Um, there's also the, uh, image of, uh, Saturn Debar
and his sons by Goya, famously sort of, uh, uh, sanguinary,
uh, uh, painting by Goya that also was, was removed.
So these are slightly absurd examples.
One, uh, particular example that I would give is
that necessarily this act in UK must give power
to Ofcom to regulate, as I've said.
And that means they say, if you meet
of comm's code, that's enough.
You've done enough to protect freedom of speech.
What has actually happened though is
because ofcom has to have discretion how it, you know,
how it writes that code, it, you know,
it can't be dictated to by Parliament.
Ofcom has set an incredibly low bar, uh, uh,
platforms are required to do almost nothing
to protect freedom of speech, and
therefore the regulator has been empowered
to essentially nullify the statutory
protection for free speech.
And this protection was something
that was politically quite important.
You know, the government at the time was saying,
look, this is important.
It's essentially been nullified by the regulator,
and this is the danger I was trying to get at.
It's very difficult, uh, for parliament to,
to enact its intentions
because there must be such a powerful regulation.
Thank you very much, Brynn.
That's, uh, all we have time
for this evening your time this morning, ours.
I really appreciate, uh,
you taking time to present
to the committee. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Uh, if we can now invite, invite rather,
the Australian Age Assurance Technology trial.
Um, Tony Allen. Thanks Tony for joining us this morning.
Um, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time, um, you allow for questions as well.
Good morning, chair. Thank you very much.
Uh, sorry I can't be there in person.
I was in New Zealand a couple of weeks ago,
but I'm back in the UK now.
Um, so, uh, thank you very much for, uh, accommodating, uh,
me coming along to give a brief update on the Australian Age
Assurance Technology trial.
Uh, my name is Tony Allen. I'm Chief executive
of the Age Check Certification scheme.
We're a global body that texts checks
and tests the age assurance systems work, um, in accordance
with, uh, international standards.
Uh, we were asked by the Australian government to, uh,
lead a project, uh, quite a large scale project, uh,
to explore whether or not age assurance can be done
and can be done privately, safely, and securely.
Um, the purpose of the trial was really
to assist the Australian government in its thinking when it
came to the implementation of its legislation.
Quite importantly, it wasn't actually about the online, uh,
the, um, uh, social media, uh, restrictions.
They actually came along
after the trial had begin,
had begun its work in, in Australia.
It was more about, generally speaking,
how you make the internet, um, age aware, how, how, um,
uh, providers can be, uh, assured as to the, uh, age
of users, uh, or, or people viewing material
or using material or uploading material, uh, to make
that something that they can then deliver age appropriate
experiences, uh, to, uh, so it's not about, um, controls.
It's not about restrictions. It's not about censorship.
It's about ensuring that children have an
age appropriate experience to enjoy, uh, and develop
and thrive in an online space.
Um, so the trial looked at, um, uh,
a few key aspects, uh,
but principally, um, they were looking at whether
or not it could be done privately, securely,
and effectively.
Uh, and on those, uh, three things, we found evidence that,
uh, yes, it can be done.
There is in fact lots of evidence of it being done.
They're not just, uh, theoretical.
A lot of the, um, uh, platforms, a lot of the, uh,
online services already have age assurance tools,
uh, in place.
Um, uh, it can be done privately.
Um, in that, the way that, uh,
age assurance technologies have been built is about, uh,
gathering the minimum amount of data necessary to be able
to provide an age related eligibility decision.
One thing that is really important to understand is
that age assurance is not identity assurance.
Uh, you do not have to prove who you are
to prove how old you are.
You walk into a bar and you, uh, walk up to the bar.
You don't have to prove who you are to buy a drink.
You just, uh, bar, uh, stuff look you up and down
and go, yes, you are old enough.
Or they might ask you for something to prove
that you're over 18.
What you, what you provide to prove you're a routine
of Kiwi access card
or whatever, doesn't have to contain all of your, uh,
identity information to prove that fact.
Um, they can be done securely.
Um, the systems
and processes that are built have been built on things like,
uh, open banking connect,
or on, um, uh, links to, uh, school records,
like what's called one way blind
or two Way Blind, uh, checks for, uh, data.
So that means that the, there's no way that the person
that's asking the data and those can, can get the full data,
and there's no way the person that is providing the data
knows what that data is being, um, used for.
And it can be done effectively. It does work.
Um, it's not 100%, uh, none
of the age assurance systems will deliver a 100% result.
None of them are completely infallible.
They all require, uh, continuous vigilance.
But then you also go back for more than
probably nearly a hundred years, or more than a hundred
years or so, it's been illegal to sell tobacco
to children in New Zealand.
Uh, that has had a massive impact on reducing the number
of children that start smoking,
but it hasn't eliminated children from starting to smoke.
Uh, they can still get hold of tobacco.
They can still get it from places they
know how to get it from.
So don't think of, uh, age assurance as being a
zero sum game.
It is about improving, reducing the likelihood
that children are gonna, uh, have a, a,
a poor online experience improving the likelihood they
receive a, uh, a positive experience.
And it's also about, uh, a little bit of the, uh, reverse
network effect.
Um, if you can have a impact on, uh, 70, 80%
of the children, you get a reverse network effect.
'cause the biggest pressure that children face
to participate in social media
or do other things is that all their mates do it.
And if all their mates aren't doing it, you have
that reverse network, um, effect.
So we did a lot of work on the, on the trial.
It is all free. It is all available online.
Um, it is, um, uh, leading into the, uh,
new international standard, uh, ISO 2 7 5, 6 6, uh,
which is, um, uh, currently coming up
to its final adoption ballot.
We're really hoping that New Zealand, uh,
ends up voting in favor of it.
'cause at the moment, new Zealand's position has been
to vote against, um, uh, which kind of means, means
that New Zealand's a bit of an outlier in the world
because everybody else has been in favor of it.
Um, but we are, um, very keen to, uh, see age assurance, uh,
see it implemented, uh, see it working, see it effective,
and see it helping to protect children from online harm.
Thanks very much. Um, Tony, I'm gonna ask, uh,
the first question just around the idea of age, uh,
assurance from a regulatory perspective
and whether we, if we were to go down this route, um,
follow some of the international practice of, of, uh,
sort of setting it up from a regulatory perspective
that it has to be assured, um,
and taking the responsibility on from a governmental
perspective versus saying to providers,
you need to know social media providers, you need
to know the age of your users.
Um, you've got a whole lot of different ways of doing that.
One of them is some of these systems.
Another is, you know, it from the algorithms, um,
that you're using from the data, from, you know, the, the,
the patterns as I understand it, they can know down
to the date, um,
or, you know, month of birth, uh, given
the way a individual is interacting.
Um, is, is that a reasonable assertion for me to make that,
that we could just expect, um, social media platforms
to work out for themselves, how they're going
to determine that?
Um, it's over 18 using their platform?
Yeah. What whatever age you set is a policy decision, uh,
how, how you then go about it is a practical
technical, uh, decision.
Our recommendation would be that I wouldn't overregulate
that in terms of, like, for instance, requiring a, uh,
like you've gotta pick from this part.
You gotta do it way you've pick from a,
a particular, um, approach.
I would suggest that if you are gonna use something
that should be independently tested and certified,
and we've been working with the joint accreditation service,
uh, for Australia and New Zealand on, on that, uh, for,
to cover the, um, the, the New Zealand, um, uh, environment.
Um, but I would also say that, um, the, uh,
your regulations are probably best placed if
they're outcome focused.
And that's exactly as you described there,
whereby you place the obligation on the, uh, provider
to ensure a safe environment for children.
This is actually no different in an online world.
You have a, you have safety requirements
that the chairs you are sitting on are required to be safe
provided by the, uh, custodians of parliament.
There is no difference between that and the, um,
and the online, uh, world.
What I would say on the issue of the algorithms is
that's fine, but even the social media companies will tell
you it takes six to eight weeks of activity online
before those algorithms start to develop a good picture
of the age and the profile of the person
that is, is using them.
So if you are going for the basis of using the, um,
the algorithm, you have to allow children to experience, uh,
what they see with social media and everything
before those algorithms will start to pick up enough data
to be able to do that kind of analysis
Point taken. But I suppose
it's a backstop, right? Um, Phil Twyford,
Thanks Tony. Um,
that's very interesting.
I just wanted, um, for the lay person,
could you give us a sense of what you think the current sort
of best practice mechanisms are
that are, that are available?
And secondly, I just, um, wanted to ask, you know,
we have this system in New Zealand called Real Me,
which is a centralized online identity
kind of authenticator.
Um, does that have a place in these kind of mechanisms?
Um, so yeah, good question.
There there are three different types of age assurance, uh,
age, uh, verification where you find someone's date
of birth, you bind it to them,
and then you, uh, make a calculation age estimation
where you use AI technology that can assess your face,
your hands, your, uh, voice to, uh, make a guess of
how old you're and age inference is, where,
where you find any other facts about an individual
or from which you can draw a reasonable
inference about their age.
They're a licensed commercial airline pilot,
or they're in year seven at school.
Those types of facts give you an, an inference about age.
There is no, um, right or wrong way of doing it,
and I wouldn't say that any
of them are any better than the others.
Um, and depending on the use case will depend on
what might work best.
And it is people, generally speaking,
when they're proving their age
or proving something about themselves
or doing something that they wouldn't necessarily want
people to know about.
And so maybe they're watching a particular type
of pornography or they're wanting to do gambling
or they're wanting to, uh, uh, uh, buy a weapon
or whatever it is they, they want to do.
And so you have to pick the right approach for the right,
um, uh, uh, use case.
Um, and what I would say is yes,
absolutely digital identity has a role to play in that,
but be very, very careful,
and this would be a lesson from the UK
and from other jurisdictions
around the world about tying age assurance
to having identity, um,
because you open up a whole series of privacy concerns,
a whole series of issues around whether
or not the government can track that.
And we all know people who work in the identity world know
that can't be done, but the public will never believe that.
They believe that if you are using your government id,
the government can tell what type
of pornography you are watching.
Mm-hmm. Uh, very quick final thank you from JI Quick.
Yeah, yeah. So this is in regards to, uh,
your technology not storing any information.
And, uh, this is to address the privacy
concern, which I fully understand.
So if there is someone who is under age uses somebody
who is older to open an account,
and you said that there will be a random kind of check
and that random check pops up
and they use another older person to continue
with their account because you have not stored
that information, so you don't know
who was the initial person
who helped this person open the account.
So, uh, it looks like it won't work in that situation.
How would you explain that? If you don't have the
information of the original image, you haven't stored that
so the person can continue
to use any random person who is around them?
Yeah, that's a very good question, and,
and you've got, uh, two particular issues for that question.
The first is, of course, that yes, we, we advocate
for not storing the data,
because the flip side of that question that's a barrier is
that if you do store that information,
you are then creating an enormous database
of everybody's information about
how they've accessed things.
And that becomes itself a honey pot of data
and, uh, and, and material.
And that's something which, which,
which creates much bigger problems.
The second problem you speak about is the,
is the issue of collusion.
Um, and technology will not solve collusion, uh, technology.
If you've got a, a, a colluding parent who is prepared to,
uh, effectively work with their, their child to, um,
enable 'em to access something that's age restricted,
that is no different than that parent buying them a credit
of booze and taking it down to the park
and say, enjoy this with your mates.
Mm-hmm. Mm.
So that, yeah, we can solve that.
Thank you. Um, Tony,
very much appreciate the time taking to join us this morning.
Um, thank you very much. Thank you
for coming in at your late evening members.
No problem. We are now gonna move, um,
down there general a little bit to John Terrace, um,
from Media Matters in NZ, Inc.
So John, welcome, uh, to the table here.
Thanks for being flexible on the time.
We're gonna go straight to you.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including time for questions.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I'm the President of Media Matters in New Zealand.
We are incorporated, uh, with Children's Media Watch
and, uh, we are 30 years old
and our particular aim is to help
to protect kids from online harm.
I'm a former, uh, parliamentary opposition
spokesman on broadcasting.
Prior to that, I spent 15 years in radio and television.
I would like to commend the committee
for instituting this inquiry.
In particular want thank Catherine Witt,
who has brought a member's bill
before this parliament, which helps to address the issue.
I would suggest that there is now a large amount
of evidence from our own university researchers from
credible private agencies like Internet New Zealand,
from mass movements like
before 16, from government agencies like NetSafe
and the broadcasting standards, authority,
and polling organizations like, uh, Ipsos,
who had a poll out this morning.
These together show conclusively that serious
and widespread social
and psychological harm are present daily in the lives
of the young and the vulnerable in our community.
We are talking here about exploitation, misogyny, bullying,
harassment, bestiality,
and threats to maim kill or rape.
It is a serious issue
and has not been properly addressed either
by the present government or its predecessor.
Other governments like our own, are well ahead of us.
The UK government has already passed limits on access
to social media by those under 18
and is considering a further lower lowering to 16.
The federal government in Australia has passed a law which
will come into effect in a few weeks, which is similar.
It is commendable that the Minister of Justice has promised
to introduce legislation limiting online stalking
before the end of the year.
But this does nothing to limit
or curb the equally unacceptable online prevalence
of bullying, fat shaming, threats of rape,
and other forms of online hate, which have flooded
our social media spaces.
The Harmful Digital Communications Act
was a good step in its day, but this law is outdated,
and as with all our other penalties,
does not recognize online abuse
to anything like the extent which is needed.
Uh, I can threaten to kill a member of this committee, uh,
on the street and be subjected to two years in jail.
I can utter the same threat online with complete impunity.
Currently, the only laws in the space in Arturo in
New Zealand, which are
currently the only laws in this space in Arturo in
New Zealand, are only slightly better than the
law of the jungle.
It is appreciated that there are people
of goodwill in the present government who would like
to see some action in the media space,
but technology is moving very fast
and seriously incapacitates our democratic processes
to react to anything like the urgency, which is called
for in our time.
Unhappily, the default position
of a modern democratic government went under pressure
to deliver, as is the case here is often
to kick the can down the road,
and this will just not do anymore.
The previous government tried that
and it paid for it in the polls.
Of course, justice is not helped by the manifesto positions
of some members of the current co coalition, uh,
which oppose limitations on hate speech in the name
of free speech.
All of us would want to uphold freedom of speech
just the same as we would want to uphold motherhood
and apple pie.
But that does not mean that we should not allow others
to have a corresponding, right.
For example, you can't in New Zealand
exercise an untrammeled freedom of speech.
In other words, you can't say exactly what you want online
or anywhere else for that matter.
Uh, not that is,
and this is the important point that I would like
to conclude with, not if that is already recognized,
uh, in law as a caveat on our unlimited freedom of speech.
You can't just say what you think, whatever you like,
wherever you like to whomsoever you like, um,
there are various legal, legal caveats on
that in just the same way.
You're not entitled to promote that right to free speech,
uh, on the internet when it robs the rights of the young
and the vulnerable to their own peace of mind.
Please do let us allow young people to have
a childhood. Thank you.
Thank you. Terry. Questions? No questions.
Thank you very much for taking the time to present
To us this morning. We're
very, any questions
From The, to be allowed to come along and talk?
It's freedom of speech and action.
Thank you. Great. Um,
Members, we will now move, um, back to Eric,
um, who is online.
There we go. Um, morning, Eric, we've got 10 minutes
with you this morning, including any time for
questions. So over to you.
I'm sorry, did you say two or 10?
10, Yes. Thank you.
Um, and, uh, my apologies for my, uh, miss calendaring.
I did not get the time zones correct
between New Zealand and California.
Um, so I'm very sorry for any disruption that caused.
No worries. Good morning.
Uh, my name is Eric Goldman, and I'm a professor
and associate dean
for research at Santa Clara University School of Law,
which is located in California Silicon Valley.
I have been teaching, practicing,
and writing about internet law since the 1990s,
and I appreciate the opportunity
to share my views with you today.
I impose laws that force internet publishers
to distinguish adults from children online,
what I call a segregation requirement, so
that segregated children will have restricted access
to online information, services
or tools, what I call the suppression requirement.
I will mention four general points
before I turn to my substantive objections.
First, there's a semantic confusion about the differences
between age authentication, my preferred term,
age assurance, age estimation, and age verification.
The mechanics of each vary,
but my objections apply equally to all of them.
Second, age authentication is a prerequisite
for any child's safety or harm policies.
Publishers can't protect children if publishers
do not know who they are.
Thus, any online child safety
or child harm regulatory intervention must necessarily
address the problems of age authentication.
Third age authentication processes always impact adults.
Everyone must be age authenticated
to segregate the children.
Fourth, it is a false equivalency
to analogize online age authentication
to offline age authentication, for example, compared
to offline age authentication,
online publishers incur greater marginal costs
to do the authentication.
And in the process, consumers are exposed
to unprecedented privacy and security risks.
To maximize my time, I will highlight 13 objections
to segregate and suppress policies.
Point number one, as New Zealand privacy Commissioner
Michael Webster recently said,
age authentication will quote, require the collection
of large volumes of personal information
of social media users.
Every currently available commercial offering
invades consumer privacy.
Point two, requiring children to routinely age authenticate
as they navigate the internet will teach children
that privacy invasions are the unavoidable cost
of accessing vital information and services in our society.
This lesson will permanently distort
how children view privacy.
Point three, the routine disclosure
of highly sensitive personal information such
as biometric scans or driver's license information.
As part of any age authentication process,
unavoidably puts consumers at greater security risk.
Indeed, numerous authenticators have already suffered major
data security breaches of their authentication data.
If the goal of, uh, age authentication is to kill,
keep children safer, it is cruelly ironic to force children
to regularly disclose highly sensitive private information
and increase their exposure
to potentially life-changing data security violations.
Point four, children know how
to defeat age authentication barriers using
freight fake credentials.
There's already an black market for such credentials.
Inevitably age authentication mandates teach children
that they should routinely lie to overcome the government.
Im position 0.5,
children will navigate around age authentication barriers
by exploring riskier corners of the internet
where age authentication isn't required.
As New Zealand privacy, commissioner Webster said,
restricting children's access to social media may quote,
expose them to online environments with little
or no child center.
Privacy and safety controls.
Channeling children into more dangerous parts
of the internet is by definition,
counterproductive to child safety.
Point six, children need experience online to prepare
for their digital futures.
As adults, children want to learn how
to navigate the internet smartly and safely,
and develop the resiliency necessary to survive
and thrive As adults.
Suppression mandates hinder children's developments
of those vital skills.
Point seven, children derive crucial
and life enriching benefits from their internet usage.
Suppression mandates take away some of those benefits.
For example, many children participate in online communities
where they make life enriching connections
and gave gained self-actualizing insights
as one of many examples.
L-G-B-T-Q miners often face serious challenges
to accessing information
or connecting with community members offline problems
that are easily solved online.
However, suppression mandates such
as social media bans can kick children out
of those communities and degrade children's development
and psychological wellbeing.
Also, suppression mandates may block children's
participation in political discourse on matters affecting
them that would benefit from hearing from their unique
and, uh, voices and perspectives.
Point eight, child child populations experience
heterogeneous benefits and problems using the internet.
Due to this heterogeneity,
a suppression mandate will routinely benefit some children
populations and cause problems
for other child subpopulations.
The economics term quote, Pareto Optimality
describes policy changes where that make one
or more groups better off without
disadvantaging any other groups.
There are no Pareto optimal online suppression options.
It is impossible to impose a suppression mandate
that uniformly benefits all children without harming any.
For example, a suppression that blocks children's access
to online communities might improve some children's mental
health and simultaneously breaks friendships
or connections that other children lie upon
to manage their mental health needs
is regulatory malpractice
to describe any suppression obligation
as uniformly benefiting children.
This marginalizes
and erases any child subpopulations
harmed by the intervention.
Instead, policymakers should candidly
and publicly admit
that their child safety measures inevitably harm some
children and accept the political consequences.
Point nine, age authentication mandates impose new
authentication costs on publishers.
Age authentication processes also make it harder for readers
to reach online publishers,
which degrades the publisher's revenues
by squeezing publishers.
Profit margins, age authentication mandates drive publishers
out of the industry or out of the geography.
Age authentication mandates always shrink the internet
for children and adults alike.
Point 10. As publishers exit age authentication mandates
reduce competition among publishers,
which further raises consumer prices
and reduces quality,
the surviving players will consolidate into a smaller number
of larger enterprises, discouraging new entrants,
and reducing industry dyna to boot point 11.
To boost revenues,
some publishers will install paywalls further,
raising consumers costs, paywalls, deepen digital divides
between haves and have nots.
Paywalls also make it harder
and more expensive for citizens
to stay educated about their governments.
This produces more low information voters who struggle
to participate in democratic processes.
Point 12. As publishers cope
with age authentication mandates using paywalls
or registration walls, consumers will find it harder
to speak online in an unattributed manner.
This endanger some categories of socially vital speech, such
as whistleblower content
and truthful negative information about powerful
enterprises and people.
Point 13, age,
authentic pro age authentication processes will provide the
foundation for more pervasive online surveillance.
Governments will inevitably co-op
and extend the age authentication infrastructure
to control citizen movement
and information access online, including publishers,
forcing publishers to do identity authentication,
and then requiring publishers to impose block lists.
For these reasons, I view mandatory age authentication
as the single biggest regulatory threat to internet freedom.
I closed my remarks with two suggestions for
how the committee might proceed.
First, I encourage the committee not
to get sucked into vendors debates about their comparative
privacy, security, and accuracy, strengths
and weaknesses, these debates or distractors.
I have enumerated important reasons
to oppose a mandatory age off online age authentication,
even in a hypothetical counterfactual
where vendor solutions offered perfect
privacy, security and accuracy.
Second, I encourage the committee to rethink its inquiry
as child harms online.
I suspect your constituents do not want you
to foc focus only on the Internet's harms without equally
accounting for the Internet's benefits.
Any inquiry into internet regulation put should put front
and center the many important and, uh, many
and important ways children benefit from the internet.
This suggests an inquiry reframing into
how your committee can improve child welfare
or child's self-actualization online.
What can the government do
to help children be their best selves
with the help of digital tools?
With this reframing the limits
of segregated suppression measures becomes clear.
They delegate responsibility onto online publishers
to magically and single handedly fix large scale
and longstanding social challenges.
This won't work. Instead,
government should invest in whole society of solutions
that bring together expertise across many institutions.
Again, my apologies for my delay in time zone management.
I, again, thank the committee for this
opportunity to testify.
No worries. Uh, and thank you, Eric for your, uh,
submission this morning, our time.
Really appreciate it. That's all we've got time for.
Uh, so we're gonna move on
and invite the next, uh, submitter
to the table. Thanks, Eric.
Thank you. So we are now inviting the working group on
gaming and regulation from Canada.
Hello, I'm here.
Morning, Sarah.
Uh, thanks for taking the time to meet with us.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes with you,
including any time for questions.
Gonna hand straight over to you.
Thank you for joining. Perfect.
Thank you so much for, for inviting us to,
to share our submission with you
and hopefully, uh, an opportunity to clarify
and answer questions as well.
Um, I'm Sarah Grimes.
I'm a full professor in communication studies
and, uh, named Wolf chair in Scientific
and Technological literacy at McGill University.
And a member of the, um, the working group on gaming
and regulation, which is a collection of academics, uh,
policy makers as well as industry stakeholders, um,
with an interest in a number of different issues relating to
regulation and gaming.
And, uh, myself
and, uh, three other members are experts on children, youth,
and privacy, um,
and are very, uh, we're, we're quite, um, honored
to have been invited to submit, uh, a comment, uh,
to this inquiry and very happy to be here as well.
Um, so I will, um, give a brief summary of our submission,
but I wanted to leave as much time as possible
to answer any questions, uh, that you might have for me.
Um, so I'll get started. Thank you.
The harm that children here defined
as individuals under the age of 18 years,
may experience online are of increasing concern
to governments, policymakers, educators, parents
and children around the world.
This submission that we sent analyzes the risks
and harms children can be exposed
to in the digital environment, and recommends key regulatory
and educational approaches
for mitigating their impacts while prompting
and upholding children's rights in line
with the UN convention on the rights of the child,
specifically the general comment 25 on children's rights
in the digital environment.
The GC 25 current evidence shows
that digital technologies offer significant opportunities
for children's learning, their play connection, civic
and cultural participation, and their creativity.
However, digital technologies can also be used
and deployed in ways that expose children to a range
of online risks, including privacy violations, predators,
bullying, inappropriate content myths, and disinformation
and exploitative commercial practices.
Importantly, children's exposure
to these risks is not evenly distributed
and often correlates with their levels of digital access,
their digital skills,
and the supports that they have
available to them in their lives.
Therefore, effective interventions
for addressing potential harm must move
beyond blanket age-based restrictions on children's digital
technology use.
Instead, we advocate for evidence-based approaches
to the design and regulation of the digital environment,
as well as educational initiatives that one,
support children's agency
and their rights under the UN convention
on the rights of the Child.
Digital services
and platforms should be designed to enable children
to make informed choices about their online interactions
and experiences, and ensure that they're
provided with appropriate opportunities to engage
and participate in digital life.
Two, to preserve children's right to privacy,
this includes restricting
or limiting digital practices
that can violate children's privacy, such as targeted
advertising, invasive
and potentially, um, privacy infringing,
age assurance systems, age verification systems, profiling
and nudging, ensuring
that children's privacy is a key consideration in the design
of digital services and platforms,
and requiring that children receive clear child appropriate
explanations about how their data is processed
and how they can protect their privacy online.
And three, encourage digital literacy
because children build resilience when they learn
to manage online risks.
Digital services
and platforms must be designed to help children
and their parents or caregivers develop digital skills.
Open communication
and trusts, uh, highlight that our submission responded to,
uh, two of the terms of reference
that were included in the call.
The first was understanding the nature, severity
and prevalence of online harms
to children in the digital environment.
And we spent a lot of time talking about the difference
between risk and harm, as well as the difference
between risk and hazard and how that relates to harm, um,
because those things are often confused in public debates
about the risks that online life can pose
to different children of different ages.
We also answered, um, number, the,
the second one we answered was designing a safer digital
environment for children, where we talk about the inadequacy
of age restrictions alone for addressing
and for especially building the big, uh,
gaps in children's literacy and resources.
Um, and how these things can not only help them to address
and manage risk when they encounter it, so that risk does,
is less likely to lead to harm,
but also will support, um, all of the many benefits
that kids can encounter when they use digital technologies
and engage in life online.
Um, so I would like to now turn it over.
Uh, if there are any questions, um, that would be great.
I'm here. Great.
There's one from Vanessa Winnick.
Um, thank you very much for your submission.
Really interesting to hear from you.
Um, I'm interested, um, in, um, the ideas of, um,
making safe the, um, uh, project, uh, the,
the, the practice of nudging or algorithms.
Is that done in practice in Canada?
No, it's not. Um, there's limits, obviously, uh,
and different literature that talks about, you know, nudging
that's not exploitative.
Um, I think for, if we're talking about children
of a certain age, uh, that are much younger, uh, we're not,
I, I don't see any real use case of an appropriate nudge.
Um, so to, to kind of clarify that, um,
this would be coming, coming from like an education kind
of perspective or like to promote like healthy, uh,
you know, fitness practices and, and that type of thing.
Um, but still a reliance instead of like building, you know,
kind of like your own strategies and,
and working with family members and, and teachers
and friends, um, is not, it's not preferable.
Um, so it's not that I think that all of the practices,
um, that we talk about can be made safe.
Certain practices would be probably minimized
or extremely, um, moderated
and restricted, uh, when targeted to children.
Um, you know, I would love to see, uh, evidence
that you can use nudging techniques in a really
beneficial and healthy way.
Uh, and, you know, I'm, I'm open, uh, to those kinds
of uses, uh,
and to kind of flipping the script on, on the way
that they've been used so far, which is predominantly, um,
as you've, uh, surely been discussing to compel, you know,
prolonged behavior and, and purchases.
So, um, it's not that I think that every single, uh,
design feature or practice can be made child appropriate,
but, um, I think that what we're advocating for is really
to take a more nuanced approach to some of these things
where the immediate, uh,
answer isn't necessarily an age restriction,
but that it's evidence-based,
and that if it's not going to be restricted, that there's,
uh, you know, evidence that it, that it should not be, um,
beyond just, uh, a concern.
Um, that, that all kids are being impacted in,
in the exact same way. Thanks.
Thanks very much, Phil Twyford.
Thanks, Dr. Grimes.
Um, so a lot of the submissions
and the argument that we've been, uh, considering has,
has really, uh, focused on the, um, age restrictions
as a blunt instrument, um, something, a kind
of a regulatory tool that can be got around and so on.
But the, the kind of context, uh, at,
at least in New Zealand is that, uh,
it's an almost entirely unregulated space.
Um, probably not all of us,
but I certainly am, um, uh, conscious of the fact
that there is significant social harm being, uh, sustained
by, uh, adolescents whose brains really are not, um,
at a developmental stage to deal with the kind
of online world and particularly social media.
Um, I just think my question is based on your work, um,
do you think, do, do you see any other tool or initiative
or policy that could do, uh, that could address the risk
and the social harm and the hazards, uh, experienced
by adolescents exposed to the online world?
Anything other than a, than a ban in all
of its with all of its imperfections?
Yeah. Uh, I mean, I think that chipping away at
the actual design and,
and operations of not only social media,
but a lot of these digital platforms, um, is, I mean,
I look to something like the age appropriate design code in
the uk, the Children's Code,
where it's not about having blanket bands,
and it's not about making restrictions based on
arbitrary in the sense of it's a top down decision,
not necessarily based in, in, in evidence or science
or rationale beyond.
It's too challenging to do this properly for kids
of different ages, so we'll just ban them.
Um, that's arbitrary in that, in that context
where the onus is really put on the companies.
And what's really interesting about
the social media ban in Australia, for instance, which, uh,
obviously this is impacting, uh, all of us, um, countries.
Canada also doesn't have much regulation, uh,
currently when it comes to, uh, the tech industries
and digital platforms.
Looking to them, uh, for this example is,
Mm-hmm. She froze. We lost,
Sorry. Hello?
Yep. Sorry. We lost.
Okay. Uh, sorry about that.
I've been having some issues with my internet. Um,
So we can hear you. Maybe
just finish that thought
and then we're gonna round off Sarah.
Okay. Um, yes, sorry.
Uh, it is to put the onus on the companies
and the age band in Australia is already putting quite a lot
of onus on the companies for the age assurance, uh,
and age verification and,
and making sure that kids aren't entering in
and monitoring, you know,
and imagine all of those resources could be put
to making sure that their experiences were age appropriate
in platforms that were, you know, that were
otherwise suitable for them, uh, beyond our fear
that major companies are doing things that are harming kids.
Um, it, it seems really kind of,
it a misplaced focus to me
and to many others in the working group
that the companies are kind of getting away with a lot
of the bad behavior, still able to direct it
to older adults, as well as young adults
who don't fall within the age restricted protected group.
And, and that, that the, those troubling and,
and problematic design features can continue.
Kids will encounter them as soon as they hit
that age threshold with little exposure or skills and,
and knowledge of how to deal with them.
Um, I, I would rather see that be the focus.
Right. Thank you very much.
Appreciate the time, um, that you've given us this morning
and appreciate, uh, you sharing your expertise.
We're gonna move on to our next submitter, um, now,
which is the rape and ABR
and abuse support Southland, uh, via Zoom.
Uh, Kiara welcome, uh, to the committee this morning.
We've got 10 minutes with you, including any time
for questions over to you.
Kilda Corki.
I'm for Southland Rape and Abuse Crisis Center here.
Sorry, Tina, uh, I've just gotta correct myself.
We've got five minutes with you this
morning, including time,
Question. Sorry.
Thank you.
Um, course, Suzanne Enga, uh, I am the a CC lead
and the systems, um, analyst here at South and help.
Firstly, I want to thank you for, um, the opportunity
to submit a submission
to this really important, um, inquiry.
And thank you for actually holding the inquiry
and giving us that, um, overview of what's happening in our,
for our, our submission.
We are not IT experts
and don't declare to be our
expertise is in supporting the survivors of rape and abuse
and, and sexual harm.
It's really important for us to bring some focus
to the underlying issues that impact, um, our survivors
and leave our ran vulnerable because we see that every day.
And so we really have some points that we want you
to consider in this inquiry.
I want to start this by saying that I wear two hats
for this discussion.
I wear the hat of the Kai for Southland Health,
and I also wear a hat
that represents the survivors of sexual harm.
So I am a survivor,
and I want to start by telling you
a little bit about my story to kind of help you understand
what is important about your inquiry today.
So I was raped when I was 16 years old,
and that has impacted my entire life.
What I need to say about that, um, is that much of
that, that incident was influenced by a significant amount
of grooming, that grooming
was underpinned by.
What allowed that grooming to happen was the sense
of being disconnected, the sense of being undervalued,
and the sense of being marginalized
as a Maori woman in New Zealand.
My experience as a child growing up was one of racism, one
of many, many examples of systemic racism
through nearly every interaction that I had in my life.
Now that's very generalized,
and I won't go into the exact examples,
but that's the experience of many
of our Ranga tahi today too.
Through that, through that sense of disconnection
and not belonging here
and being undervalued, that left me very vulnerable
to the concept of being groomed
and being told that I was valuable
and told that I was beautiful.
And then that put me in a position
of an extreme vulnerability,
which subsequently ended in a horrific rape.
When I apply my story to what we are considering today,
and I've listened to the other speakers and,
and they're far cleverer than me,
but what I want you to hear from our submission is that we,
the intersection between racism
and online sexual
or exploitation is leaving our ran
and our tamari vulnerable, particularly ran
Maori and ran
and Tam Maori, who equally experience racial
rhetoric that has grown in our country.
It's sad to see that
after all this time, I'm 57 years old, then my experience
of racial discrimination is not much different than
what my now experience.
We have to consider that alongside decisions
that we are making about legislative changes
that we're thinking about to protect our tam.
Um, I know you've got my paper in front of you,
so I don't need to go into the details,
but what I particularly want to highlight is the importance
of us working as a country that honors so
that we can avoid our having that same sense
of being marginalized, undervalued, and,
and just basically disrespected,
which will then avoid them seeking comfort online
and being, um, vulnerable to the grooming that
can happen and does happen on a daily basis.
I leave you with this story
and I'm gonna let, um, Suzanne talk as well.
Um, but I leave you with a story quickly
that I heard from a region in, uh, the Upper South Island
where we have a group of, um, gang members who are
actively recruiting young girls in,
uh, um, intermediate school aged 11 and 12.
They're actively recruit, recruiting them
through the internet, through online social media.
Now, that's happening today.
I suppose that we have to, you know,
while we can talk about all of the, um, uh, you know,
about this topic at a higher end, um,
we need to actually also think about it from the ground.
I encourage you to do that.
Thank you, Tina. Um, uh, we appreciate you sharing, um,
your story, uh, and what's happened to you
and how that relates to the inquiry
that we are undertaking at the moment.
That's all we've got time for, um, this morning.
We do need to move on to our next, um, submission,
but I wanna say, just wanna say thank you for, uh,
sharing with us this morning.
Thanks, Susan. Um, we're gonna move
to the International Center for Missing
and Exploited Children, um,
and we've got col, um, here in personal this morning.
So,
Uh, good morning chair members of the committee.
Um, my name is Col Gaon.
I am the CEO for the International Center for Missing
and Exploited Children Australia, ICIC Australia,
where we are working to create a world
where technology cannot be used to harm children.
I'm going to cover three items in my submission.
One of them has already been covered by Tony Allen,
but I just want to reinforce how we see things
from the advisory board that worked on the age assurance
on behalf of the federal government within Australia.
The first thing I'd say is age assurance is
possible, and it can be done.
And I refer to the right honor about Mr.
Twyford, where he talked about the real me.
New Zealand has already established digital government
identity that can be used
and it can be used in a privacy concern.
What I would say to the committee is to think
of using an advisory board who can actually hold technology
and the development of technology for the rights
of children, protection of children,
and for the rights of RO in New Zealand.
The second thing I'd like to say to the committee is, look
after the agency of young people
and children, there's been many people talking about
regulation and thinking that we're going
to be banning young people from accessing the internet
to actually find their own identity to find their education.
This is not what the committee is exploring,
ex exploring the protection of children.
And what I'd say to the committee is, social media ban
or delay does not mean social media ban or delay.
You can have a system where persons under the age
of 16 are able to access a platform
that they can communicate and can digitally progress,
but you are holding that platform to be utmost responsible
and ensure that trust and safety is possible.
We have a platform already that's already using dating apps
to actually bring in people.
Roblox, which is a gaming platform where you have 10
and 11 year olds going on that the CEO is monetizing
young people and bringing in dating platforms.
Since 1998,
the Federal Trade Commission in the USA brought in the COPPA
Act, child Online Privacy Protection Act, that was
to encourage online service providers not
to monetize on young people while they were online
service providers have failed, technology,
service providers have failed.
Now governments and regulators
around the world are requiring
that they regulate this platform in the absence
of due diligence and moral responsibility.
This is a tipping point. It's a tipping point for children.
We need to be very firm in relation to general comments.
25 to deny Nations Convention for Rights of Children.
We can regulate the internet,
we can regulate the safety of children.
We just need to actually bring that regulation in line
with international standards.
And this is my third and final point.
New Zealand, New Zealand needs an eSafety regulator.
You have MB regulating parts of the internet.
You have NetSafe, which is a non-government organization
with a legislative power
for harmful Digital Communications Act, doing part of it
Internal affairs with the Digital Safety Directorate,
where I worked for eight
and a half years running some
of the biggest international operations,
combating online child sexual exploitation.
And you also have other parts of agencies
regulating parts of the internet.
It is fragmented, it is disjointed,
and the public within New Zealand do not have a sense
of one purpose, truth, nor does the government,
nor does the opposition.
You need a single source of truth
to actually bring in regulation.
Regulation is not dictated by a regulator.
It's enforced by a regulator.
It's created by the legislator, it's interpreted
by a judiciary, and it's actually brought about
by social contract
for which people will vote their politicians
and members of parliament to ensure that their safety
and the wellbeing of their young people is maintained
within the internet.
I'm open to questions.
Yeah. Thank you so much, uh, for your submission.
So, uh, when we heard from the Australian Age Assurance
technology, they admitted
that it's not like a hundred percent it can be controlled.
Um, and, uh, there are ways that young people can bypass it.
And also from another submitter,
we heard about increase in the VPN usage.
Uh, I'm keen to get your comment on that. Yeah,
It's not gonna be a hundred percent,
but we have seen this, when we looked at COVID Ovid 19 in,
uh, in New Zealand, we had COVID passes put onto mobile
phones, and in order for you to access your COVID pass
and your mobile phone and use a biometric signature, so
where we're looking at circumvention, we brought this up
with the age assurance every single time about circumvention
in young people, is you can actually bring in a system
that integrates a biometric on device without
releasing any private information.
It's what we call the double-blind protocol,
the use of VPNs.
Yes, VPNs can be used, however, more
and more service providers are now preventing
publicly available VPNs for being used.
PornHub, for example,
actually brought in age assurance based on the French.
Within 24 hours, VPNs went up by 38%, 24 hours.
Now, what they're starting to do is deny VPNs from accessing
their system because they don't want
to actually have the harm or,
or the liability in relation to not having age assurance.
It's the same thing when we look at banks.
When we look at KYC, know your customer,
they have certain protocols in place to ensure
that they're not subject to anti, uh, money laundering,
counter finance and finance of terrorism activities.
There is technological ways to actually deal with this.
Um, this smoke
and mirrors that have been put forward by different people
and talking about free speech,
free speech doesn't mean absolute expression.
We have laws that deal with harm.
We have laws that deal with distribution of harm.
Thank you. So in this, uh,
obviously privacy is, is a concern.
So where do you think there is that right balance?
Where would you agree for, uh, that kind of balance to be
for, uh, because we have
to address the concern of privacy as well.
On the other hand, you know,
what does it mean restricting means more, uh,
privacy weed. So where is that balance?
So privacy does not actually circumvent actual social
and moral obligation
of protecting young people with privacy.
And we're looking at age assurance.
You can actually have verification in hopping on the device.
And where it goes to the service providers is they actually
get a token saying, this person is under 16,
this person is under 18, this person is over 18.
They get zero, zero data in relation
to who's actually accessing in the account.
When we look at what we're looking at online harm,
as we're preventing young people under the age of 16,
being able to access
and create accounts in the open social media environment,
we can create social media environments for under sixteens
where they still have that agency,
but they're not going to leverage up
or leave their privacy with social media platforms.
Technologically, it's possible
where you can have the balance of privacy,
you can have the balance of expression,
you can still actually engage
with the United Conventions rights of children.
You can still engage with Article 20 of the Bill
of Rights here in New Zealand where
people can express themselves.
But what you can't do is you cannot ignore the harm
that's been experienced by young people. Great.
Yeah. Um, just, I'm picking on something that you,
you've alluded to a couple of times there.
It's about setting up a specific platform for young people.
Um, how would that work?
Um, you know, because I mean, it, it sounds like
nirvana in one sense.
You block all the up, bad stuff out,
just have stuff you want them to access.
Yeah. So this is one of the things
that the actual technological service
providers are mingling with at the moment.
Mm-hmm. Because they can see
that this age assurance is coming in mm-hmm.
Through the Digital Service Act,
through the cs, a directive mm-hmm.
Through the, uh, social media, uh,
minimum age act in Australia.
So they're under pressure to actually ensure
that they push their trust and safety resources.
So we're talking about this removal of co-mingling.
Even when you look at the legislation in Australia,
people can still set up accounts on YT kids, YouTube kids,
because it has strict, uh, requirements
and moderation and content.
We do this in New Zealand with the online films, the films,
videos of publications, classification act.
We actually have, or 18 movies on Netflix.
We have things in relation to accessing, uh,
adult pornographic material.
People can't just walk into a shop under the age of 18
to access pornographic material.
Why is the internet a different space
for our people here in New Zealand? The thing
They'd probably say it's too hard, I think is the price
Comes back. It's not hard
though. It's not hard
because what happens is you push the
liability to the service providers.
Mm. The social media service fires
have to be held accountable.
Mm-hmm. And I'm noting that chairs actually getting,
we're getting ready to call time,
but what I can say to you is yeah, is that it's not hard.
It just needs to be regulated.
It needs sensible thinking,
and it basically needs creativity.
Just clear direction for online social media providers.
They know what they need to do.
I have this conversation day in, day out
with all the actual top technology companies
and kind of going, your time is ticking.
You have failed to actually protect children.
Now you're gonna be regulated just like you were regulated
in relation to what type of power you were going
to put onto a mobile, mobile phone,
or electronic devices because you failed.
Thank you so much for your time this morning.
Thank you very much. Um, you've been here. Thank you.
Excellent submission. Thank you. Very good.
Um, can I now invite safeguarding children on Zoom, uh,
Willow Duffy.
Hi, Willow. We've got, uh, we've got five minutes
with you this morning, including any time
for questions over to you.
K can you hear me? We can.
Okay. Koto Kato
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today,
and I'd just like to thank the previous speaker
who was incredible and, um,
I hope you really take on board the messages
and the advice that he's given.
As this committee considers how to respond to online harm,
I urge you to look beyond mainstream digital platforms.
The most serious threats
to children are emerging in encrypted, decentralized,
and extremist driven spaces such as discord, telegram,
and gaming environments such as ROBLOX
or abuse is coordinated, ideological,
and deliberately hidden,
and including online exploitation networks a 7, 6 4.
And I want you to remember
that when you continue doing this work,
unlike traditional terrorist radicalization,
which is ideologically driven, this pathway operates purely
through sadistic gratification.
7 6 4 is an online group that sexual exploits
and encourages minors to self-harm.
Children are being coerced in acts of self-harm,
violence, and degradation.
They're not isolated incidents.
They are strategic statistic
and increasingly targeting New Zealand.
There is a growing interest in adopting a social media band
similar to Australia's approach.
While this may seem like a straightforward solution,
we must ask, what does this actually mean in practice?
Will it address the full spectrum of online harm?
While the social media ban may appear to the general public
to be an easy fix, I urge you to consider
that reality will be will the reality be as simple
as flicking a switch?
Children are not only exposed to the risk of social media,
they're accessing pornography sites, video platforms such
as YouTube and other digital environments, sometimes
accidentally, sometimes intentionally
and narrow ban risk, creating a false sense of security
while leaving other harmful spaces unregulated.
We need legislation that reflects the complexity
of today's digital world,
and that includes criminalizing the use of AI tools
to generate child sexual abuse, material regulating
platform design and accountability across all
online environments.
Establishing one agency
or task force to disrupt an extremist sec, um,
extremist exploitation networks,
and embedding digital safety education in
schools and community.
And critically, it is vital
that young people's voices are listened to
as you work through this process.
They're not just passive users of technology,
they're experts in their own experiences
and their insights must inform the solutions we
build Online.
Harm is not just a digital issue,
it is a child protection issue.
And we must not forget that
the government has the opportunity to lead
with urgency and clarity.
Let's not jump to flick that switch
and let's ensure our response is as sophisticated
as the threats we face.
Thank you. Thank you. Questions for Willow.
Willow, there's no questions from the committee.
We appreciate your submission
and taking the time to join us this morning.
Thank you, Marvo.
Thank you. We are now moving to, um,
e Pat online,
Kia Kiara.
Um, Vivian, welcome to the committee.
We've got, uh, 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions. So overview
Kiara, um, Kiara Ian talk.
My name is Vivian and I'm from Ecpat Child
Alert New Zealand.
Thanks for inviting us to share our submission with you.
Um, today, um, as Pat New Zealand, we are part
of the world's largest influencing network dedicated
to ending the sexual exploitation of children
with a membership of 142 civil society organizations in
115 countries.
Um, indeed New Zealand was there from the beginning.
One of it, Pat's founding members, um, was, um,
founding members and first honorary president was Wellington
born Ronald Michael O'Grady, eg.
Pat's global mandate is
to end the sexual exploitation of children.
And here in Edo, we're the only organization whose sole
focus is to address the sexual
exploitation of New Zealand children.
We sit on many cross-agency groups,
including the National Combating Child Exploitation Group,
NB led reference group for all of government plan of action
for combating mo modern forms of slavery, um,
and the digital child exploitation filtering system,
independent reference group hosted by the Department
of Internal Affairs.
In fact, we've been part of that IRG working with telcos,
the Department of Internal Affairs,
and various other government agencies since its inception
last month and after we handed in our written submission,
we've released our latest research report called I'm Just
Content To Them, living Through Sexual Exploitation
in our Tatau New Zealand.
This is a qualitative, qualitative study commissioned
by the Ministry of Justice and a NZ bank,
and has been completed over the last couple of years.
This research is based on the experiences of victims
who were sexually exploited as children
and adolescents, including through online channels.
But at the time of the interviews, they were aged between 17
and 67 years old.
This is not a new problem.
The report centers the victims' voices
of the victim survivors themselves, which describe
how digital environments facilitated, intensified,
and sustained exploitation,
and how institutional responses fail to prevent, detect,
or interrupt these abuses.
To that end, I'd like
to focus on six key points from our written submission.
The first being to refocus responsibility
to shift blame from victims to perpetrators and systems.
We need a fundamental shift in public and institutional.
F net responsibility for harm caused
through exploitation lies purely with the perpetrator
and the systems that fail to prevent it.
Our findings show victims frequently internalized blame,
and were treated as though they chosen to engage,
especially when it, um, is an online focus.
Um, so I'll just like to read a couple
of quotes verbatim from our report.
Um, these are the voices of the victim survivors themselves.
So this is, um, and obviously
the names have all been changed.
Um, this is a young person called Kate at the time,
it felt really complex.
Like I'd never been through anything like that.
I just remember, like, I would go to the counselor every now
and then, and she was lovely, but it didn't really
help, honestly.
I think I just needed to be told that it wasn't my fault,
like someone to actually just sit
there and let me talk about it.
And then like, no judgment.
It felt like no matter where I was turning, it was like,
oh yeah, no, that's bad.
But you did participate.
You know, and there was always that victim blaming,
even from like the professional places.
And this is from someone called Jamie.
That's how my parents found out.
I mean, I can't say I would've handled it the way they did,
which was like very blame orientated towards me.
They made out that it was my, that was,
I was the problem when obviously, like, yeah, I wasn't,
I think the conversation could have been more compassionate
rather than blame orientated
because I'd be far more likely
to tell them things and open up.
I knew if I knew like I was not gonna be yelled at.
Kate and Jamie both felt
that their parents' responses lacked insight into whose
behavior was problematic, and that seeing them
as mutual participants instead of as victims,
they were attributed blame.
Um, we've seen this in other submissions to this, um, panel,
um, where we've see that how the responsibility
of other organizations have said how the responsibility
for digital abuse lies firstly with the perpetrator,
and then secondly, with service providers and systems.
And, um, and other ones said, one suggest
that we revisit Safe harbor protections.
My second point is that we need
to implement structural accountability
and, um, safety duties for digital platforms.
So, um, New Zealand must introduce regulatory measures
to hold platforms accountable
for the environments they create.
This includes requiring platforms
to improve age assurance mechanisms, content moderation,
and prompt take down processes.
Um, I won't talk too much about that
because calm, um, who, um, we've done some with in the past,
um, really articulated that quite well just before.
The third point is to reform
and expand holistic intervention and recovery supports.
The systemic response
to sexual exploitation is currently fragmented, delayed,
and often re-traumatizing.
Um, and so when we're talking about online harm, um,
and the way that the systems perpetuate that, um,
by not having those access to holistic recovery supports,
including stable housing, addiction services
and economic assistance, um,
we don't address the profound multi-domain
impacts of exploitation.
Um, our, my fourth point is to close the Digital
Guardianship Act, we must gap, sorry,
we must formally recognize
and address the vulnerabilities created
by unsupervised digital spaces.
So, um, again, several of the, um, submitters
before that I've heard, um,
just in the last little bit have, um,
said very similar things.
Perpetrators exploit digital environments
where they can be digitally alone
and unsupervised with young people.
Um, and we've seen this a lot already in, um, you know,
when we look at real life grooming situations.
Um, but with online, um, platforms, this is not something
that we've looked at yet.
Um, so again, from our report, if I'm,
I read another quote from Kate again for my parents.
I think hearing someone else's story about
how it can go wrong or like how to put it in place,
safety precautions would be really important.
And in having safe places for like children and anyone to go
and discuss these things with people who understand,
I think not growing up with this sort of technology
and having understanding of it would've been pretty hard
to say, like, how did this happen so easily
to blame it on me saying, you must have done something.
Um, we've seen other organizations also submit on, um,
investigating the look, the, um, use
of user control safety tools such
as hanau configurable browser extensions
for local content filtering, um,
or strengthening guidelines in education.
Um, my fifth point is
to mandate comprehensive digital speci digital
specific safety education for all.
We urge the panel to, um, push for developing
and mandating comprehensive age appropriate curriculum
focused on healthy relationships, online risk
and coercion dynamics.
This education must move beyond outdated
stranger danger narratives, critic.
Crucially, this curriculum must be complimented
by professional development for school staff
and community education for parents.
Um, looking at mod modernizing abuse at prevention education
to reflect the realities of contemporary online risks.
Um, so this is a quote from Kyle from our report.
I remember, you know, you get sort of thought taught
that you don't get into a van with a stranger kind
of safety talk, but I don't really remember anything about
like how people online might be like
trying to get your clothes off.
I don't remember any of that,
you know, that kind of message.
I guess it's not gonna just be some guy trying
to snatch you into his van.
Um, another person, Jamie, reflected this concern.
She refle, she ref reinforced this concern.
She reflected on how online safety education in school,
although well-intentioned, failed to account
for the complexity of digital relationships,
messaging focused on strangers left her with a false sense
of safety when her abuser was someone she'd met in person.
I felt like at this point in time,
a big thing in school was talking about cyber safety
and cybersecurity and everything.
And the issue was that like, I'd met him in person.
We were like, they were just like,
if you don't know them, don't add them.
But I had met him and in my mind it was like we knew
each other so I was safe.
Um, so other organizations have also, um,
recommended increased investment in education for teachers
and strengthening guidelines
and education for hanau and caregivers.
Um, I'll leave it there for now.
Um, if there's any questions, um, didn't time myself,
so I'm not sure we've
Got one. Uh, time for
one quick question from, um, Francisco.
Uh, thank you chair. Um,
and thank you so much for the report.
Um, I'm just content to them.
There was some way we could table that
as part of this committee.
That'd be good. Um, just have a quick question around the,
um, 0.4, how you've, uh, suggested
requiring platforms to improve age assurance mechanisms.
Um, would that mean that would be supportive of, um,
age gating and things like that
and social media bans for, um, for a particular threshold?
Or, I don't wanna, you know,
put words in your mind just clarifying your stance.
We, um, haven't, um, we haven't confirmed either way
yet, but we are very worried that a straight, uh, ban, uh,
um, depending on age will, um, reduce the further need
of the educational, um, frameworks that we're pushing for.
Um, we've seen in other countries that when you, um, and,
and sorry, in other industries as well, that, um,
once you start talking about, uh, any kind of ban
or abstinence, then it, it, it really leads to, um, reduce,
uh, emphasis on education and protection measures.
Um, and so we're very worried that that is, um, going
to be this the consequence of, of such an age ban happening.
So the very simple idea that, um, if we, um,
suddenly, you know, overnight say
that there are no under a certain age, under 16
or whatever it might be on a specific platform,
then there's no need to look at any kind
of protection measures anymore.
Okay. Thank you so much, Vivian.
That's all we've got, um, time for this morning.
Really appreciate you joining the committee.
We're now moving to Shine education
and training, um, with Dr.
Emma. We've got five minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions over to you.
Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
In the scope of our work, we hear from many stakeholders,
communities, and from our own wider organization
who express concerns about children
and young people experiencing online harm.
Broadly in the current digital landscape.
The ways in which technologies are in the main designed
for profit and developed in male dominated environments
create problematic gendered technologies.
Current apps, platforms, algorithms, generative AI
and games are shaped with entrenched sexism, homophobia,
racism and misogyny, perpetuating harmful gender
and sexualized norms.
Algorithms nudge young people towards pornographic content
porn and social media influencers
who reinforce unhealthy gender norms and abusive behaviors.
In the context of family violence, there is increasing data
to illustrate how children
and young people are impacted by the misuse
of digital technologies by a coercive parent.
A few examples include intrusive parenting, surveillance,
monitoring, using the child for parental stalking,
forcing a child to watch sexualized content,
sending private messages in social media platforms, creating
and using pseudo profiles.
These tactics impact negatively on
their physical and mental health.
Nonetheless, it's essential to emphasize
that young people experience digital environments in
positive and negative ways.
They are not passive about their use.
They gain many benefits from digital technologies.
The United Nations conventions on the rights
of the Child Amendment in 2021, extended children's rights
to world.
Therefore, tech companies must be held accountable
for ensuring that young New Zealanders are safe online.
Young New Zealanders are entitled to the right
to participate in the digital world,
whilst also being protected from exposure to violence
and adverse gender and sexualized ideologies.
Young people, schools
and whanau alone should not shoulder the work of advocating
for platform regulation and change
and ecological collaborative approach in practice means
that the distribution of responsibility is shared
and coordinated across all sectors.
This looks like strong platform regulation,
service provider responsibility,
risk assessments from suitable content, user empowerment,
autonomy, transparency, and accountability.
Technology companies have the capital resources
and innovation to create digital spaces that are safe
for children and young people without penalizing them.
Addressing the online harms
that young New Zealanders experience forms a crucial
component of eliminating family violence
and sexual violence.
Ready for questions.
Thanks Emma. Are there any questions for Emma?
No, thank you. Um, very much Emma,
appreciate you taking the time to meet with us this morning
and for your submission.
Thank you. We're now moving to the children's rights,
um, Alliance Arturo New Zealand,
and we've got, um, Amanda joining us, uh,
here in the room here.
Take a seat there. And we've uh, we've got you
for five minutes this morning, Amanda,
including any time for questions.
That's great. And I've got my colleague online as well.
Ashley Sheer should be joining us.
Yeah, we've got her coming up.
Oh, she's part of our, my,
Yeah, she's cut the, bring you up onto the screen now.
Oh, awesome. Thank you. Yeah,
Yeah. Um,
Koto core Amanda DEA ua.
I'm the chair of the Children's Rights Alliance
and a public health physician at Otago
University Wellington.
The Children's Rights Alliance is the Civil Society
Coalition, um, committed to advancing implementation
of the United Nations conventions on the rights of the child
with the designated International country Focal point
for monitoring our implementation
of the convention in in New Zealand.
Um, and I'll cut to Ashley to introduce herself.
Good morning everyone. My name is Dr. Ashley Sheer, um,
and I am a member
of the Children's Rights Alliance Hotel in
New Zealand Steering committee.
Thanks, Ashley. Um, the single most important message
that I'd like, um, you to take from today, uh,
is that the online world is complex.
It's got significant risks
and significant benefits to children and young people,
and it is really important to apply a children's rights lens
and children's impact assessment to this issue to ensure
that we have the most
effective decision making for children.
And I just highlight the, um, the government's
children's impact assessment tool that we have available
to guide us, um, in this area.
So I'm gonna make, um, two other, um, key points.
And the first is that online harm is, uh,
it's a critical issue for children and young, young people.
The harms are multiple in complex
and they encompass all the things
that you've been hearing about from, um,
online exploitation, particularly sexual exploitation, um,
extremism, radicalization misogyny, um,
generative AI racism, white supremacy exposure
to harmful commodities that are pushed
by commercial interests to tobacco vaping, gambling,
junk food, um, um, sugary drinks.
Um, uh,
and it it also exposes children to bullying, um,
and mental, uh, distress, um, and social pressures.
However, the online world is a critical source
of information belonging identity.
Um, it is a, an increasingly important avenue
to access services,
and it's really important during times of crisis, you know,
COVID, civil defense, um, emergencies and so on.
And it's particularly important for those, um,
children whose rights are most at risk.
Um, so the most marginalized children
and young people, um, in our society.
So coming back to my first point, um, it's,
it's a com it's a complex issue,
and a children's rights lens is really critical
because it helps you to navigate the duty
that you have under the convention to protect children, um,
to provide for children,
and to ensure children's participation.
There are a lot of tools available under the convention, uh,
and this holistic framework, um,
it is based on child development.
Uh, so, uh, it's really important.
Um, the other thing
that a children's rights approach can bring is a systematic
approach to making sure
that children's best interests are considered.
That these adequate governance for children, data
and monitoring of issues
and critically that children's voices
inform these decisions.
They want to be part of the solution.
So when we, uh, talk
with children in our research at Otago University, um,
and with say, the children, most recently children want
to be protected from harm.
They want adults to protect them.
They want their voices to be heard
and to be part of the solution.
And they particularly want, um, uh, accountability for,
for the tech companies.
And so what we'd like to see is really strengthened, um, um,
restrictions on, on the tech companies in terms
of their algorithms, their advertising for children,
their content management reporting, um, remedy
complaints, um, monitoring and, and ongoing accountability.
And children are really well placed to be involved in, in
that work because they understand the online world a lot
better than we do.
Uh, and it's changing extremely rapidly.
So it's really important to have a framework, um,
to really future proof things for the future. Kda. K.
Thank you, Amanda.
I think that's, uh, all the time
that we've got with you this morning.
Really appreciate you coming in
and presenting meeting. Thank
You. Thank you. Thank
You. Um, members,
we are now lunch breaking until 12 o'clock.
Uh, so we'll back on for our next submitter at 12 o'clock.
Thank you.
It there? Mm-hmm.
Eating disorder. Good afternoon, Sarah.
Welcome, um, to our select committee.
Thanks for taking the time to come
and present, um,
to our select committee this morning on mute.
Um, you're on mute at the moment I think,
but, um, we are with you for 10 minutes,
including any time for questions.
So we'll fire away.
Wonderful. Thank you so much.
And I'm just going to change this a little.
I was expecting to be on slightly later, but that's okay.
Are you okay? Yes.
I just need to get back to my notes is all.
I had a time down a little bit later, but that's all good.
Um, so yesterday opening, uh, 10 Kato Kato.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Sarah Rowland.
I'm co-founder and acting co-chair
of Eating disorders CarePort New Zealand.
We are a lived experience organization led by parents,
carers and whanau supporting loved ones
through eating disorders,
or we support over 600
families currently across New Zealand through online groups,
monthly Hui and one-to-one support.
So the committee will have read our submission,
but today I wanna focus upon key gaps and urgent actions
and international context, particularly
around eating disorders and body image harms
and the wider impacts upon people,
particularly young people.
The harm we are seeing is that eating disorders are
among the fastest growing mental health challenges in
New Zealand, yet they remain deeply under recognized
and inadequately addressed across our health systems.
Hospital presentations have risen sharply in recent years.
Families tell us their children are often caught in online
loops that glorify thinness and restriction
and constant comparison.
And as a result of that, spirals are created
and amplified by algorithms.
So even when young people are searching for help,
the system keeps pushing harmful content at them,
legal, but deeply harmful content such as diet culture,
restrictive eating, and manipulated body images
or appearance based competition
can have devastating effects.
New Zealand legislation has the opportunity to go
beyond illegal content and explicitly address these risks.
At the recent New York Global Summit on digital harms,
in new mental health governance lived experience, voices
and clinicians highlighted the urgent need for action.
The Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese,
said at the United Nations General Assembly,
we want children to have a childhood, not too much to ask.
And he highlighted Australia's world leading actions
to protect children from social media and online harms.
European commission President Ursula von Le, added it's
for us as parents to raise their children,
not algorithms.
Our generation needs us to step up and give this a go.
And in Australia recently Emma Mason lost her daughter Tilly
to suicide after su um, social media bullying.
Her voice could be a pivotal one in convincing more
world leaders to act.
The UK Online Safety Act
and European Union Digital Services Act offers emerging
regulatory approaches.
Some criticisms though include loopholes around legal,
but harmful content
and weak enforcement, some vague definitions of harm
and slow AP adaptation to technology.
These critiques reinforce that protecting children
requires more than age limits.
It requires algorithmic transparency,
independent audits, and clear accountability.
This is something that the 2024 body image report
by the classification office
and NetSafe have confirmed the scale
and seriousness of this problem in New Zealand.
So some key recommendations we believe
around legal, but harmful content Legislation must go beyond
illegal content to explicitly target content
that is legal but deeply harmful, including eating disorder
and body image content.
And platforms must disclose how content is recommended
and ranked with independent audits being really essential To
prevent the applica amplification of harmful content
and with age restriction, they need to be paired
with protective measures.
Age limits alone we don't believe are sufficient.
So combine these with privacy, protecting verification,
moderated spaces
and digital literacy programs for youth whanau and educators
and platforms must face enforceable penalties.
So transparent reporting, public accountability for failures
to protect children a part of that
and to embed lived experience and expert input.
So formal inclusion of lived experience, voices
and clinical expertise is essential in oversight
and audits and review processes.
And these laws should be regularly reviewed to keep pace
with emerging technology and AI generated content
and evolving risks.
So really a lived experience reflection from myself is
it has affected me greatly
and it breaks me to know how deeply my own children
who are now young adults have been impacted.
And despite all my efforts to delay, monitor, uh,
delay and monitor device use.
So 10 years ago I made a deliberate decision
that were unpopular with summertime, even amongst those
that were meant to protect them, to monitor devices and use.
And really painfully to me those have been vindicated.
So we're watching an entire generation live
with these consequences
and the environment
that drives these harms has already developed
and we're playing a catch up.
So for us, closing eating disorders
and body image harms are a real focus.
We must be aware of these are preventable illnesses
that thrive in unregulated digital ecosystems.
If we change the environment, we change the outcome.
And New Zealand has an opportunity
to lead internationally here.
And ensuring transparency and embedding expert oversight.
Combining H limits with safe supportive digital environments
is a really robust way to go.
And just finishing EDCS really welcomes, um,
and supports the changes that we believe can take place
and we would really welcome the chance to contribute
to ongoing consultations
and any implementation working
groups. Thank you for hearing me.
Thanks very much. Uh, Sarah,
are there any questions to Sarah? A
Very quick one palm sheet, a very quick one just
to understand a bit more.
Sarah, from your work, is there any evidence about, uh,
which children are more susceptible to this kind
of social media in regards
to body image and eating disorders?
Or if you see like,
because not every child experiences social media in the
same, is there any information that you can share
with us if you have, um, about,
We don't have anything open.
Um, however, we do know that eating disorders are, um,
a combination of genetic susceptibility
combined with environment.
So, um, the recognition
of genetic susceptibility is greatly under recognized.
But the Butterfly Deloitte Foundation 2024 report does
identify, uh, the high prevalence
and growing prevalence of eating disorders.
And in another report there's identified between up to 32%
of youth are now seriously affected, so much so
by disordered eating that they meet with clinical diagnosis.
Now, that's not an insignificant number.
So full recognition that this is a condition which is guided
by genetics and environment.
So some people are more disposed to others
and might initially be identified
with having anxiety disorder, for example.
So there is quite a growing, um, bulk
of evidence out there now, which is easily searchable, um,
across multiple countries.
Thank you very much, Sarah.
That's all we have time for this afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've
taken to present to the committee.
Thank you. I'm now gonna welcome, uh, Cotu
who are joining us for, uh, 10 minutes,
including any time for questions.
And we've got Helma here, uh, to present.
Thanks for, uh, joining us this mor this afternoon.
Uh, Koto, thank you so much
for having me here this afternoon.
Uh, for those of you who don't know, tu,
we are a think tank based in Auckland, founded
by Sired Gman.
And this is an area looking at human flourishing.
That's been a focus of ours for a ma a very long time.
As, um, as you all know, I'm sure from Ed's background
and interest in this area,
we have been looking at the issues of online harm
for a very long time.
And this ranges not just from the issues of mental health
and wellbeing, but also around, uh, young people, prenatal,
postnatal issues, uh, the relationships,
the underpinning relationships
around socioeconomic development and the like.
As well as more recently looking at the issues
around technology and its impact on society,
including social cohesion
and the way in which societies, uh, can function
and operate together in the global commons.
Um, as you will see from our submission is there are a
number of complicated and, uh, interdependent factors.
There are impla impacting on the way in which online harm
is, uh, seen around not just New Zealand,
but in like-minded countries overseas as well
is it's a combination of education, technology, so,
uh, sociological, which means
that our young people are ill prepared
for the world that they live in.
And it's important we don't just say that the,
the digital issues
or the technology issues in isolation of some
of these other factors that are contributing
to mental health and other, other issues.
Uh, one of the key points I'd like to make is
that it's really important we recognize that the concept
of harm is complex, is what online harm means,
varies depending on who you ask.
As I'm sure from a lot of the conversations this morning,
it's very clear that it means something for different people
and what young people perceive as harmful.
It may have, um,
the content may have not been generated
to create harm in the, in the original instance.
What we're also aware of and have seen in our research
and experience is that young people
with impaired social emotional development are more likely
to be susceptible to harm compared to other people, uh,
'cause compared to other parts of our
or other young people in our, in our society.
The other thing that's important to also acknowledge is
that the digital world is, uh, evolving
and continuously evolving.
And the way in which our sociological
and cultural changes have taken place over the last 20
or 30 years, um, has meant
that there is an increased a blurring of the boundaries.
So whether that's the digital
and real world, whether that's boundaries,
our social boundaries between parent
and child, between educator
and child, between the way in which society
operates as a whole.
So therefore, one of the, I guess, important factors
to consider is how do we prepare our young people
to be more resilient and to be able to cope
and continue to operate in the digital world.
We are not, um, I guess young people need to know how
to use digital technology.
There is no way we're gonna turn the internet off.
So we need to be able to provide the environment
to prepare our young people for what's coming ahead.
And this means that there is, uh, we need a recognition
that there isn't a one size fits all
or a magic silver bullet that will, um, address the totality
of issues that young people face.
And I'm not gonna highlight all of these,
but listening to some of the conversations,
there is a vast number of issues
that our young people are facing.
And this is increasingly, uh, blurring with the introduction
of ai, looking at deep fakes, looking at these new channels
of harm, looking at the merging in the convergence
of different technology platforms.
Um, I know there's a lot of attention on social media,
but from a lot of the conversations here, gaming platforms
and the like, are equally important to consider
in terms of the way ahead.
Um, as naturally there is a lot here
that our education system needs to address.
We need to be able to strengthen resilience
and the mechanisms for our young people to cope
and deal with what's, um, what's coming at them.
This is gonna be a combination of not just upskilling our
educators, our parents and our caregivers,
but also ensuring that our young people are able
to co-design these solutions.
It's, um, important to recognize
that young people want the me, um, the mechanism to be able
to influence and come up with solutions that are going
to be suitable for what they need going forward
and creating the platforms, creating the channels.
So the forums for them to be part
of those solutions is important.
The other thing is we do need systems-based approach.
Uh, we need long-term solutions.
We need to look at validated strategies rather than knee
jerk, um, quick responses to these
because, um, we, we do need to think beyond what's,
uh, what are some of the knee jerk opportunities that pre
that are presented to us.
And finally, I'd uh, conclude by saying,
we need a bipartisan approach to this.
Uh, this is gonna need everyone to, I guess, come on board
and there is, uh, no room here for a, a partisan, um,
approach to solving some of these challenges
that we face ahead. Right. Thank you.
Yeah, I thank you very much. Um, very interesting.
So effectively, I suppose what you're saying is
that just banning something, if that was the case,
isn't gonna solve all these issues.
It's the, the, it's a much broader challenge
and we've got, we need to do as much, we need
to actually really focus on equip, equipping, uh, children
and families to, to live in the new world.
Ab AB absolutely, I think is, if you look
and even listening to some of the speakers earlier, the,
the range of issues that our young people are facing, it's,
um, there are so many issues out there
and taking a one size fits all solution may address one part
of the problems that's, uh, some parts
of our communities face,
but may not do enough other, other issues or other, um,
or deal with what some
of the experiences are in other parts of our society.
So we need, uh, I guess a solution set
or an options that are wide ranging
and vary depending on the issues, the priorities,
and the urgencies for action.
Thank You. Thank you Ji Palm. Yeah, thank you.
Uh, is there any example of any program, uh,
which can help increase psychological resilience?
Because as you say, we don't have anything of
that sort here in New Zealand.
Is there an example, um, that we can look at, uh,
from another country as
As certainly, I, I don't have the data
with me at the moment,
but certainly as you're aware, so Peter does quite a lot
of work in Singapore and there are a number of strategies
and interventions that are being trialed, uh,
to look at a cohort or similar cohort in Singapore.
We've done a number of studies with young people, um,
and looking at mental health issues related to that.
And there are some, um, I guess early indicators
of some ways forward here.
So one of the most common things,
we've just completed a piece of work looking at online harm
for, um, the, with the Ministry of Women for young women.
It's one of the, I guess the common thread that keeps coming
through is young people want to participate
and we, they want to be part of, uh, the solutions.
So I think it's creating avenues in which we bring in our
young people and the broader community
to co-design those res those responses is, uh, is something
that's coming through quite clearly.
But we can certainly send through some details on some
of those, uh, interventions, if that would be
of use for you. Thank
You. That would be
great. Thank you so much. Thank
You. Full twi effort.
Thank you for the submission.
Um, accepting entirely that, uh, this is a complex area,
that it requires kind of a nuanced systems approach
and that, um, creating the conditions, particularly
for young people to develop resilience and the,
and the critical skills to deal with the online space.
I think we nevertheless are, um, interested in this inquiry,
um, uh, in the proposed age ban
or age delay for social media.
And I wonder if you would characterize that as a kneejerk,
um, uh, blunt approach
or as a prima pragmatic response
to at least putting in place some protections in
what is largely an unregulated space for our young people.
Think about our ad early adolescents, for example,
or would you characterize it as something else?
So I think in, I think in this space,
there is two dimensions at play is we need something
for the here and now because these are issues
that are manifesting and they're here.
Um, and we also at the same time need some strategies
and some policies and processes in place to deal
with the longer term issues.
So we need a combination of the two
and certainly there is no right answer for any of this,
hence why we're all talking about it.
So I do think you need, um, some things that are,
that could be up, uh, that could give you some mechanisms
to respond today for the issues
that are young people are facing.
I think the key thing though is to make sure exactly
what it is that we're trying to achieve with some
of these short term or the here and now interventions
and be very deliberate
and about the kind of the reach, the scope and, um,
and not, I guess, uh, managing our own expectations
and that our young people and their communities around it.
At the same time, I think you also need a suite of, um,
I guess mechanisms that we can continue to evaluate it
because if we find in say a year
or two that, um, some of these aren't working,
making sure we can turn 'em off,
making sure we have the right metrics
and the right measures so that we can, um, adapt as they go.
Because this is a complex, it's a,
it's a wicked problem in a, in the most traditional sense,
therefore a single solution is not gonna work, nor is.
Um, and so we need to be, uh, prepared that in six months
or a year we may create unintended consequences
and be able to adapt to those as needed.
Thank you so much. Um,
that's all we've got time for this afternoon.
Um, appreciate you, uh, presenting
to the committee members. We're now going thank
You very Much for your time.
No worries. We are now going back
to the national task force for social media, body image
and eating disorders.
Uh, and we've got Dr. Marilyn, um, Romberg welcome.
We're with you for 10 minutes,
including any time for questions.
Wonderful. Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, good morning from Western Australia.
So, uh, just by way of background, um,
I have been an academic
and a practicing lawyer, so I do both for about 15 years.
Uh, I was fortunate to graduate with a PhD in social media
and the law in 2014.
And, um, I've been researching, uh, social media
and body image for many years,
and I'm a member of the National Task Force
for Social Media, body Image and Eating Disorders.
Um, as you would've read in the submissions that we sent,
um, social media can contribute, uh,
eating disorders
and young adults are disproportionately affected.
Now, with that in mind, uh, myself
and members of the task force, uh, about a year
and a half ago, approximately, um,
and at the time the task force didn't actually exist.
We were brought together by the Butterfly Foundation,
which is a charity for eating disorders in Australia.
It's a national peak body for eating disorders.
And, um, there were several experts
and people with lived experience.
We came together and we sought recommendations
to improve social media for, um, everyone,
but specifically in the context of eating disorders to try
to, uh, decrease the impact
that social media can have in terms of causing
or contributing to eating disorders.
And, uh, we presented these recommendations at the Federal
Parliament in Australia in 2024,
and we're going to be presenting an updated recommendation
in 2025.
So I'll just go through a few of these recommendations.
Uh, but also when I go through them, I'm going to talk about
where relevant other jurisdictions in the world
where they have legislation in this area,
and also, uh, you know,
the Harmful Digital Communications Act, 2015 New Zealand,
uh, which, um, I, um, have, uh, read through
and carefully considered.
So, some of the key recommendations that we, uh, think,
or that we suggest, um, would help, uh, in this area
are, um, making social media platforms, uh, be required
to take reasonable steps
to promptly remove pro eating disorder content.
So essentially, when it comes to content on social media,
that is, uh, encourages eating disorders, um,
we suggest both a proactive
and a reactive approach, meaning that, uh, uh,
there's an onus on social media to proactively,
um, prevent this material from being on social media.
And the same token, uh, when pro eating disorder
of content is on social media, there needs
to be an onus on social media to ruin this content.
Now, I know that in the, um,
harmful Digital Communications Act 2015, section 22,
uh, it's an offense to cause harm
by posting digital communication.
So, um, but,
but the thing about that section
of the New Zealand legislation is that, um,
you need an intention to cause harm.
And with a lot of these pro eating disorder posts,
there's no intention to cause harm, uh,
to people who see it.
It just happens. And also,
another recommendation I wanna point out is our
recommendations regarding algorithms,
because there are so many algorithms that post
or that show pro eating disorder content
to people who view it.
And we recommend that there's legislation
that social media is required
to be transparent about their algorithms
and have regularly publicly available algorithm risk audits.
And in Massachusetts, in the United States, um,
there have been laws proposed to that effect.
So, for example, there's, uh, been a law that's been, uh,
proposed, but it hasn't been passed that, uh,
would require regular algorithm risk audits.
Uh, and there's also another law, another bill
that's been proposed that has not yet been passed
that would, um, not so that would prevent social medias
or forbid social media companies from having,
or, um, having algorithms, uh, for, for teenagers.
So there wouldn't be algorithms for teenagers.
So, um, I think I might stop it there.
Um, I could expand on these, uh, recommendations
for a long time, but I'm very much aware
that I only have 10 minutes.
So please, if you have any questions, go ahead.
Thank you, grant. Yeah, hi. Uh, thank you very much.
Um, I'm just, I'm really, I'm just curious, how easy is it
to define pro eating disorder content online?
I'm just, I mean, is is it easy to do
or is it mixed in with all other stuff?
I'm just curious.
Um, that's a really good idea. Uh, good question.
So, um, I, uh, define,
so I actually have a book called, uh, body Image Law
that's coming out this month.
So there's a definition in there of this content, which,
but, but I, but I use that definition from, uh,
psych research and psychology.
So if you, if, um, you look in the, um,
peer-reviewed articles
and psychology, there are definitions of this kind
of content that I think lend themselves to legislation.
So, um, if you, uh, uh, wanted, uh, you know,
if you've got a, maybe a staff member of your office
to email me, I'm happy to send that to them.
Just suppose I'm just wondering how practical is it
to actually define it?
I mean, we all understand the harm, believe me,
you know, been my community.
But how, how practical
and easy is it gonna be to define so
that we can then hold the, um, the, the,
the platforms to account?
Oh, I think it is practical.
I mean, I think that, you know, broadly,
'cause I I don't remember offhand the exact definition
that's in the literature,
but broadly, it's, uh, content that promotes
or encourages an eating disorder.
That's it broadly.
And while I think, you know, there, there are going to be,
uh, likely arguments, probably about various types
of material about what falls under it.
I do think that, um, for the majority of material,
you can be able to look at it not, and,
and say clearly whether it would fall under the definition.
Again, there's gonna be some,
some con there's gonna be some arguments
and some contentious, contentious, uh,
talks about some types of the material.
But I think for the majority, I think it can fall under it.
Thank you. Thank you so much. I think that's all.
We've got time for the afternoon.
Appreciate the time you've taken to, uh,
join us all the way from Western Australia.
Um, and I wish you the best with your launch.
Um, members, we're now moving, sorry, we're jumping
around the agenda a little bit just
as we are managing people who are yeah.
Um, available and not available, et cetera.
Uh, we're now going to Digital Equity Coalition.
Um, just like to acknowledge, uh, what the submissions
that have come before me and just moving to, uh,
presenting to this group.
Thanks for the time. I'm here on behalf
of the Digital Equity Coalition,
ro we are a national network of community organizations,
community leaders and researchers who are all working
to close the digital divide.
So everyone in RO can participate fully
and safely in our online, uh, ecosystem world.
Um, I do want to speak from the perspective
of digital equity, uh, which is also connected to equity,
obviously, um,
because I think this is an important part
for young people in our, to the digital world
and many adults is not optional.
How we learn, how we work, how we connect to our culture
and identity, uh, is done in the online world
so much these days, um,
and access to a lot of services have now moved online.
So I guess one of the biggest challenge there is that 8%
of New Zealanders already consider internet access a basic
need and human right to participate in the, uh,
in the world we live in at the moment.
Um, look, there's probably more experts here
to talk about the different, uh,
diverse needs of each of the groups.
But for our, our ranga Tahi in particular,
online platforms are, are not a luxury for some of them.
They are lifelines.
These platforms provide safe spaces to connect with peers
to express identity and to access cultural knowledge
and find support that is often missing offline.
I guess the, to bring into the conversation the context in
which we need to look at the idea
of a blanket ban on social media for under sixteens,
I'd pose the question back to adults in the room is
how many over sixteens would be, uh, would show
good behavior in the online world and social media.
So on the service, a ban might look really protective,
but I guess it's, it could be a tool
for punishment more than, uh, setting everyone up
for an education or a positive, positive experience online.
So I think the challenge there with banning a group
means that that could push them into spaces
or, um, you know, into areas
where they get into these rooms by other meets, VPNs,
burn accounts, overseas platforms to me, to meet, to me.
So I guess that's one of the biggest challenge that I see.
We're forcing our group of individuals
or people into, uh, different ways
of accessing their content.
And I like what the doctor just said about
the content itself.
So I think that's a big part of, of what we're trying
to recognize and define.
And like, I welcome the question on defining the content
because that's where we're going to have the biggest,
I guess, range of perception, conception, acknowledgement of
what that definition is.
So I'd just like to acknowledge that, um,
or some of the work that's already been done with the
DIA's Safe online systems
and platforms work previously, a lot of that social,
um, investigation has probably
already happened within there.
So I guess the privacy Commission has already warned
that the bans may drive young people into
less safe environments.
So submissions into this inquiry will have
to define a lot of that.
Um, careful there.
Um, I guess everyone is very concerned about children's
privacy online and, and the safety.
Um, look, I look at a lot of the challenges being ex teacher
of how we educate our youth and our education system.
I look at the changes that we had in the technology space
as we grew up, and I guess as we start investigating
and defining, um, safety
and, um, acts
and things like that is, is making sure that
whatever safeguards
and guard rails we put in place make it, um,
I guess adaptable and flexible enough to move with the rate
of change in the technological space.
I guess things that we don't know about today
that could come in the future could really change
how safety is perceived and monitored, et cetera.
I'd also like to acknowledge, uh, some
of the other research has been done by
the Children Young Peoples Commission, which reminded about
UNA experts in their own digital lives.
So ensuring that we get those voices into,
into this work is vital.
Um, no solutions for us without us.
So I guess it's something that I get,
get told a lot in that space.
Um, so big things for me is
around education in the group.
I guess regulation, accountability
and transparency of how we get
to those destinations is probably the second part of, of
where I hope the inquiry will move into.
Uh, and obviously as were most things, the investment in
that work is, is vitally important as well.
Uh, too often we come up with big, um,
aspirational changes, and then they're funded
or invested in on a shoestring,
and we end up getting a far less desirable result then than
we are after in the end.
So, just like to
finally state real safety requires equity as the foundation.
That means government regulating effectively
and funding inclusion.
It means businesses as about designing responsibly, means
being supported, and community leaders
building the solutions that will help
protect them in the future.
Got, uh, any questions for Chris
Very quickly?
Thank you, Chris. Just to clarify, so what are you saying is
that if we, um, go, uh, too harsh on restriction,
basically we will be deepening the digital divide?
Yeah, I think probably like, it's, I guess
that's not a real simple question to answer,
but I think as we create, uh,
a divide by restricting the limit
or restricting access to a technology
or a service on there, we are then removing a, a group from
participating in the, the,
the digital world, the digital society.
So how, I guess then it comes back to defining those spaces
and, and what is this act trying to encompass?
What are we trying to, uh, achieve by locking out
or closing out a specific group?
I guess it's on one view, you'll see it as a punishment.
We're trying to reduce them from seeing
something, whatever that is.
But on the other hand, it could limit where they find,
like I mentioned earlier, there are safe spaces
that are being used correctly
and appropriately to support them.
Uh, and whatever need that is, I guess it's more
we're punishing the user, not the act
or the, the, the negative effect on it
or the perpetrator of who put that into that space. Thank,
Thanks so much. And a final
question to Ruben Davidson.
Thanks, chair. Um, you've, you've spoken, um, Kristen,
thanks for your submission.
You've spoken about some local, local solutions
that are already in place at a community level.
I'm just curious to know, um,
where you think we sit in a global context around, uh, uh,
you know, there are countries probably doing better than us,
uh, um, and some doing worse,
but who do you think is doing better
than us that we could look to?
Uh, yeah, good question. Really good question.
I think, um, look, when I look at some
of the European countries in particular around what they're
trying to achieve in the space by, uh,
developing, I guess, I guess it's trying
to de define what the problem is.
And I guess the other part to that is those people
who are defining the possible problem
and the possible solution are usually those
that have been most affected by, uh,
or involved in the act of whatever's happened in
that negative space.
Um, but I think we can probably pull some, uh,
example research that we can post forward.
I'm sure there's probably other groups who've, who've, uh,
submitted in the past how a few months
that could give you a greater, uh, academic,
um, lens on that.
But I think what we could probably offer you is, um,
support in looking at what we've
researched in the UK in particular,
and with our Australian counterparts, uh,
and what they've been trying, well experimenting with.
And I mean, look, I think, um, each country we have its own,
uh, differences.
And I think probably that's probably where we need to start,
is looking at, see in this case it youth
and defining what, um,
what support they might need in that space.
So start with something that, uh, we're doing well here.
Got Chris. Uh, that's all we've got.
Um, time for this afternoon.
Really appreciate, um, you presenting
to the committee members.
We are now moving to Pillar New Zealand in person.
Uh, we've got Nathan here in the room, uh,
who's gonna join us for 10 minutes,
including any time for questions.
Thanks so much for having me. It's great to be here.
So, yeah, my name is Nathan, I'm here from Pillar nz.
We're a civil liberties, uh, advocacy group.
Uh, we focus to protect individual
life, liberty, and rights.
Uh, I, I figure I'll open with a, uh,
a brief oral submission and then take questions.
But, uh, in New Zealand, we want kids to be safer online
and at Pillar we share that aim,
but we believe how we get there
and how we pursue that really matters.
Limits on those rights must be demonstrably justified
and minimally impairing.
Uh, an approach protecting children must also respect
that parents hold the primary role in
and girl, uh, guiding their children
and protecting them consistent
with their evolving capacities.
Uh, this capacity faces a number of practical challenges,
but acknowledging those challenges isn't fatalism.
However, there is a, uh, uh, if we have a belief
that there's a singular top down state
and force solution that bypasses parents,
that precious platforms into overregulation,
and that creates a net that would inevitably have unintended
consequences on freedom and privacy, that is not ideal.
Uh, first principles would say that Section 14
of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act protects the right
to seek, receive, and impart information
and opinions of any kind.
And then Section five limits to
that right must be demonstrably justified
and cre proportionate in the least intrusive option.
The children CRC Article five affirms the rights
and duties of parents to provide, uh, direction
and guidance consistent with the
children's evolving capacities.
The state has an unquestionable role in protecting children
from illegal harms in conduct.
But, uh, things like child sexual exploitation,
material grooming, credible threats and serious harassment,
but attempts to police categories of legal,
but harmful speech will inevitably invite subjective
and overall removal, especially when platforms are
incentivized to play it safe.
All threat risk is privacy banning under sixteens from
social media makes everybody else prove they are over 15,
uh, at risks ending online privacy
that ultimately is a back stock in protection for freedom
of speech and puts at risk pseudonymity,
which has been a longstanding
protection for vulnerable speechs.
Uh, I would love to offer this committee a series of, of,
uh, tools that they can use to stress test proposals.
Uh, firstly, define specific harm in the cohort precisely.
Secondly, demonstrate a rational connection
between the measure and the harm, not a proxy.
Choose the least intrusive,
effective tool favoring parent centered and privacy.
Uh, preserving measures.
Weigh privacy, equity evasion in pre-commit to metrics,
public reporting in sunset slash review
dates taken together.
These principles don't actually minimize the risk
of online risks, but what they do do is craft appropriate
responses, keeping us focused on, on illegal harms
and parental agency.
The definition of the problem is
really, really important here.
Well, drafted law starts with clear definitions
and it's harder than it sounds.
If Parliament writes rules with a narrow set of branding,
social media platforms,
alternative platforms will be easily adopted.
If Parliament writes rules defined by function, for example,
feeds messaging, user, uh, messaging platforms,
user generated content, it gathers a lot of benign, uh, sort
of other platforms swept into it.
Gaming platforms with chat functions, video platforms
with logged out feeds and news sites with open comments,
all present edge cases.
What we are suggesting and,
and what we've seen is that there is three unavoidable, uh,
dilemmas that you face a trial limit when it comes
to age restriction initiatives.
Evasion miners will misstate birthdays,
they'll borrow accounts, they'll, uh, they'll browse
through logged out versions or they'll use VPNs.
There's adult friction repeated ID checks,
self video verification, extra latency and lockouts.
And there's privacy laws, centralized identity records,
cross service linkage and profiling risks.
We've heard a lot about overseas,
and I would say this, that the uk, Canada,
and Australia have all made great efforts towards online
regulation and they've all failed so far.
What was promised was a safer online environment,
but what was delivered was a more censored one.
We love to compare ourselves to these nations, but just
because they've made bad decisions, does
that mean we have to as well?
Uh, what their experiences show us is
that we should design policies
and systems around real risks,
otherwise we end up trading away rights,
paying higher costs, and merely shifting behavior elsewhere
other than reducing it.
We have three recommendations, and our approach
and recommendations are centered
around targeting illegal harms, practical supports,
centering parents and pr
and preferring least intrusive privacy preserving measures.
Firstly, we say that making parental approval
and family linking the default on
devices and the app stores.
Secondly, we say building digital resilience
to tool curriculum and short parenting training.
And thirdly, we say creating one front door for complaints
and integrate tools like Stop NCII
to block reloads of abusive material.
In conclusion, we can keep kids safe online without
sacrificing freedom and privacy.
A parent centered capacity building,
targeted enforcement strategy will do more good
with far fewer un far fewer unintended costs than a
universal identity check with broad subjective content
moderation and platform regulation.
Overall, our recommendations, which I will send
through in a written form to the, to the committee, uh,
are practical, measurable,
and in, uh, implementable between six to 12 months.
They put families first.
They tackle the genuine illegal harms, uh,
that warrant state action, and they demand useful trans
transparency from platforms.
They also preserve the constitutional foundations on which
our democracy depends.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
I've got a question that just comes out
of a comment you made about anonymity online.
Mm-hmm. Just made me consider that I know
that it's you speaking and you can say
whatever you like right now.
If you're protesting outside my office,
I also know it's you, right?
Uh, if you're quoted in the paper, I rely on the paper
to confirm that it's you that they're quoting.
Where does the special right online for
that anonymity come in, particularly around speech
and harmful speech in your view?
Well, it, it's a subjective term
that you bring forward the half of speech.
And I suppose that's the question that we should be asking.
What are the lines here? What are the definitions?
Pseudonymity has been long standing protection for speakers
who are at risk, whether they be in countries
of great oppression, whether they be be people in positions
of employment where they're scared to share
thoughts, feelings, opinions.
We know, you know, many instances through media leaks
or doxing, just how important it is
that some people have pseudonymity available to them.
So I would say the question there is, uh,
how do we define harmful content?
'cause we know what illegal content is,
but when we start getting into the subjective definitions
of what's harmful, what's hateful, what is dangerous,
who makes those rules, and
how clearly can we define them without creating a catchall,
uh, laws in legislation that is ultimately sensorial
as opposed to liberating.
Okay. Thank you Reuben Davidson.
Thank you. And thanks for your submission.
Nathan, been interesting to hear from you.
Um, I'm curious to know your perspective on what's worse.
'cause you've talked about the unintended,
unintended con consequences of regulation.
So, um, really it's a, what's worse is, is the,
those unintended consequences of that regulation
or the intended consequences of the, of the behavior
that we've heard about from a lot of submissions
around predatory behavior, either
by platforms or by individuals?
That's a great question. Uh,
the unknown is always gonna feel more ominous.
It's always gonna feel more dangerous.
We can counter what we know
and we can stop ourselves from making
mistakes based on what we know.
If we keep treating this as the boogeyman and we try
and forecast and, uh, predict what we do is we end up ring,
ring fencing ourselves in.
We don't create a free online.
We don't create a safer online.
What we do is we create more controlled
and sensorial online that doesn't serve anyone well.
Uh, we can combat the threats that we're aware of
and that that are clearly defined in the law as illegal,
but what we shouldn't do is start, uh, assuming
and imagining risks that are perceived and not realized
and taking heavy handed state action to them.
There's far better ways to address some
of these emerging threats through community efforts,
advocacy groups, and,
and mainly through parent ownership,
leadership, and authority.
Uh, there's a minority who I have heard of who say,
parents are not present in some kids' lives,
and we shouldn't make rules around exceptions.
We should make rules that hold a standard
and encourage everyone to reach that standard.
And we, some fall short, we can provide
case by case support.
I'm gonna ask a supplemental on that,
maybe slightly provocatively as well.
As a parent, um,
if I leave my kids at home unattended, I can be held accountable.
If I hand them the keys to my car
and put 'em in the driver's seat
and send them down the road at seven years old,
I'm gonna be held accountable.
What makes it okay for us to put a cell phone in the hands
of our children?
Um, with the harm that wherever it is on the spectrum,
we know that it impacts kids and that they react to it.
What makes that okay for parents to do?
And do you have any views on accountability for parents
around, um, the access they provide to their children?
Yeah. What makes it okay? Absolutely nothing.
What makes it possible? Parental agency parents should be
the first and foremost line of defense when it comes
to your child's activity online.
A father of three, myself, my children aren't old enough
to have devices and I won't be giving them a device as young
as I got one, to be honest.
I think that as we progress through this digital age,
the threats are more and more clear
and parents need to stay up to date
and involved with parenting their children.
I think bringing the state in
seems like the most effective way to do it,
but what it does is it, it
removes responsibility from parents.
Parents need responsibility,
children need parents with authority.
If we bring the state in, it'll be just like other examples,
antis smacking for example, where now we have this piece
of legislation that hangs over that is a, a threat
to parents and a bit of ambiguity to children
around who's really in control.
I think that parents should, at the end of the day,
be first and foremost responsible.
What they do as parents is not always gonna be good
or ideal, but they are parents first and foremost.
Then the state just has no place, in my opinion,
telling parents how to raise their children.
Okay. Thank you, Nathan.
I think that that's, um, all we've got
time for this afternoon.
Really appreciate, um, your submission. Thank you.
Thank you all. Thank you. Uh, present.
Okay, members, we are now moving
to the free speech Union
who are online.
Hi Steph. Uh, thanks for joining us this afternoon.
We've, um, got you with us for 10 minutes,
so I'll hand straight over to you.
Lovely, thank you. All right, well, um, thank you
for the opportunity to speak with you today.
Um, we recognize that the challenge
that presents the select, sorry presently faces,
the Select committee here isn't a straightforward one.
The digital public square is a complex space to navigate,
and one of the great challenges of our time appears to be
how we effectively translate critical pillars
of our democratic principles
and the human rights on which they rely
into digital settings.
In recognizing this complexity, we also suggest
that no solution will be perfect.
We understand and accept
that there is content on the internet, the consumption
of which poses genuine psychological risk
to users who engage with it.
However, we think that it is vital
that these risks are considered clearly and proportionally
and are empirically verified.
Today, we'll outline several of our foremost concerns.
However, we would also welcome the opportunity
for continued engagement with the committee on this issue
being that we are the free speech union, our primary concern
and contribution to this issue is in recognizing the
potential threats to free speech
that might emerge out of this work.
We caution that there is a substantial risk
that any digital intervention strategies that are adopted
to minimize harm will undermine the rights
that are enshrined to Kiwis
through the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
This is almost necessarily the case since any conceivable
digital intervention will inevitably risk both false
positives and false negatives,
either non-problematic content will be captured in rejected
or problematic content will not be captured, or both.
Every instance of a false positive
or rejected content will represent a breach
of an individual's rights to freedom of expression.
This is a serious side effect
and it shouldn't be taken lightly.
Interventions that take a broad
and blunt approach to to digital blocking
and interference are further likely
to increase the occurrences of false positives.
And so there simply must be avoided to maintain adherence
to lawful speech and consistency with the Bill
of Rights Act, we acknowledge
and share the genuine concerns for young New Zealanders
that many of our submitters will have shared today
and will continue to share today about the plethora
of adverse impacts on our young people
that they're experiencing as a result of exposure
to damaging content online.
This is a concerning situation
that we really welcome the conversation about the issue.
The challenge before us lies in finding a way
to address legitimate concerns about protecting children
from exposure to damaging content
without compromising the speech
and privacy rights of adults in the process.
Many intervention strategies
that may be effective in preventing children from accessing
damaging content would result in intolerable collateral
damage to freedoms that are guaranteed to New Zealanders
through the Bill of Rights Act.
In considering this difficult balance, we caution
that strategies that are adopted must not come at the cost
of technological overreach, censorship,
and mass surveillance for the community at large.
Context such as this one that evoke high emotionality
and a strong sense of protectiveness are
where our commitments to freedom are most challenged
and mindful of this, we urge that this is not an issue
to approach with haste and reactiveness, but caution
and wisdom, the potential side effects
of any intervention must be thoroughly considered
and action should not be taken
where those side effects are simply too costly.
At the Free Speech Union, we regularly encounter cases
where vague and over broad definitions in legislation codes
or policies result in infringements on individuals freedoms.
Many of these are grounded in the suggestion
that the views expressed by one party were perceived
to be harmful to the other,
and can variously lead to individuals being sanctioned,
dismissed deregistered find
or even arrested vague language opens the door
to weaponization and asymmetric justice
and has a chilling effect on those individuals on, sorry,
on those who see individuals silenced
and punished for expressing an alternative perspective.
We therefore implore the committee
to consider terminology very carefully.
An overboard definition
of harm will almost inevitably increase the frequency
of false positives, and this would end up capturing a great
deal of potentially offensive, controversial, unpopular,
or awful, but lawful content that are all within the scope
of freedom of expression.
Further, it would use up resources on these situations
where those same resources could instead be invested in
targeting content that corresponds with illegal activity,
such as child sexual abuse, material terrorism,
organized crime, and so on.
The Free Speech Union has raised concerns in numerous
contexts in recent years about an over calibration
or concept creep of the notion of harm
and serious harm, such that, for example,
raising a contentious issue
for discussion is perceived as threatening.
And this interpreted threat is subsequently characterized
as violence and used to suppress both robust discussion
and the dissenters themselves over calibrating our threat
detection for harm and suppressing expression in the process
stands to have serious consequences for our communities.
Since it blurs the lines between free speech
and action without allowing the bandwidth for freedom
of speech, the risk exists
that physical violence will increasingly be recognized
as a reasonable response to words that are perceived
to be hate, hateful,
or threatening Without the ability to speak one's mind,
people may increasingly feel
that the only option left is to act it out.
This is a troubling trend
that we're witnessing internationally
and we desperately hope to avoid here.
We therefore advise that any threshold for harm needs
to be thought through very carefully.
Having a clear distinction between harmful words
and damaging content is essential.
And this is especially the case in the digital square
where we know that many violent offenders have previously
been radicalized online.
We've already noted that the complexity
of this challenge means that there will be no
perfect solution to addressing it.
This means that it simply has to be considered in terms
of trade-offs, the least bad scenario,
or the approach with minimal costs or risks involved.
We again, caution that the top-down implementation of broad
and blunt instruments will have intolerable consequences and
therefore need to be avoided.
Blocking through internet infrastructure itself is the
broadest and bluntest possible approach,
and the risks of collateral damage in a high rate
of false positives makes this approach the most problematic
when weighed against the cost to New Zealanders freedoms.
Placing the onus on social media companies
to filter content is also an approach to avoid.
They themselves do not have effective systems in place
to address content moderation
and recent revelations about the traumatizing toll on the
low paid workers who are charged
with manual content moderation confirmed
that this is not a viable approach.
Instead of these top down measures, we advocate
that the role of government could helpfully be
to enable ground up approaches.
This would involve the provision of opt-in user end tools
for individuals and parents,
and the commensurate digital literacy education.
We would encourage the committee
to explore potential options for resourcing these tools
and running campaigns to raise awareness about the options
that are available throughout New Zealand.
Since these do not entail any adverse consequences
for Kiwi's rights,
these could be readily implemented without a clear problem
definition for online harm.
Effectively, work could start on this tomorrow.
Opt-in tools would give New Zealanders control over their
own digital experiences
and empower consumers of digital content
to make their own decisions about the digital environment
that they wish to curate
for themselves and for their children.
Opt-in tools are available for both networks
and individual devices,
and there are a range of options for
how these settings can be controlled.
We recognize that this approach will not prevent the
exchange of all content that is
potentially damaging to consume.
However, we suggest
that this approach provides the greatest way forward
that balances minimizing damage
and upholding New Zealander's
right to freedom of expression.
This approach provides a solution
to young New Zealanders accidentally stumbling into
disturbing content while avoiding the potential collateral
damage of all New Zealanders being subjected
to mass surveillance and heavy restrictions
on their expressive freedoms.
It enables transparency and gives the user
or the guardian the ability to decide what kinds
of content they want to consume and what they don't.
Above all though, we really caution against the use of broad
and blunt instruments, um, terminology
and tools that stand to have serious ramifications
for New Zealanders legal rights, not least their rights
to freedom of expression.
Thanks, Steve. First question from Grant
McCullum. Yeah, thanks.
Um, question,
given this is an inquiry into the on Young,
the Young New Zealanders encounter online,
does the Free Speech Union have any, see any difference
between, uh, a, a young person's, uh, a young person
and an adult in terms
of free speech like a 7-year-old versus a 27-year-old?
Do you mean are children entitled to the same rights
to freedom of expression that adults and,
And, and exposure to it?
Yes,
To an extent, but within the boundaries of the fact that,
you know, there is, there is a role for the Guardian within
that as well, right?
Like there are, there are like,
there's an equivalent version of freedom of expression
that's granted to children by, um,
sorry I've forgotten the acronym for it at the moment,
but the kind of rights rights for children
that we have in New Zealand.
Um, thank you, uh, Vanessa Ween. Um, thank
You. Quick final question. Um,
you asked, um, well,
you pointed out that, um, there'll be, um,
trade off somewhere and it's,
which is the worst of the harms.
So do you think harms to adults of not being able
to express themselves freely, um, are greater than the harms
to children who are exploited online?
When you say children who are exploited online,
could you just elaborate what you mean by that?
Like all of the online, um, sex exploitation that occurs,
um, or exposure to pornography
or, um, the harmful effects of, uh, the, uh,
way the algorithms work, um, on social media, um, various
and, um, multitudinal, um, forms of harm that are, um,
shown through, um, meta analyses of large, um,
multi-centered, um, peer reviewed literature.
Well, I don't, I don't think that we are saying that any
of those things are not problematic,
right? No, we're not. No,
But I'm asking that it's worse to,
I'm asking deliberately, do you think it's worse
to not be out for an adult
to not be able to express themselves?
Do you think that's greater
'cause we have to weigh the harms?
Do you think that's a greater harm than, um,
children being exploited online?
I think we need to look down the road of where
that would lead in terms of it.
It's not just kind of adults being able
to say what they want, right?
That it's, it's more about how exactly is the implementation
of this going to go and what are,
what are the impacts on adults going to be of,
of going down a road like this?
Like how are we actually going to go about preventing that?
Yeah. Thanks so much.
Thanks Steph, for the time you've given us this afternoon.
We're gonna need to move on to our next submitter now.
Um, so I appreciate you taking time interest.
We're now moving to Clear Black online, uh, clear.
If you're able to turn on your mark and your video
clear.
We've got five minutes with you this afternoon.
So, uh, over to you, including any type of questions.
Thank you. Uh, Tina Koto.
So I am here
because I have significant experience working at the
intersection of digital technologies and youth mental health
and wellbeing, but particularly
with a focus on rainbow communities.
Um, I think rainbow perspectives are critically important,
but they're often overlooked in discussions about the
benefits and harms of online digital technologies.
Um, I completed a master's thesis
that looked at the critical importance of these spaces
and technologies for rainbow young people in 2017 and 2018.
Um, and then I've also worked providing mental health
support services as Chief executive
of the National Rainbow Mental Health charity outlined
from 2019 to 2023.
The main message I really want to emphasize today is
that addressing and particularly regulating harmful online
content is really complex.
Um, and it inherently requires balancing competing needs.
Um, a lot of the, the popular conversation
around online harm, especially for young people,
skews away from that nuance
and is really looking for these silver bullet solutions.
Um, it's understandable.
There are significant online harms that, you know,
particularly groups like parents would want these easy
solutions for these quite thorny problems
and to protect the young people from those harms.
Um, but those silver bullet solutions don't actually exist.
You know, some of these common solutions we've seen proposed
overseas, like these social media bans
won't actually achieve their aims for various reasons
that I spoke to in my submission.
Um, but they will cause further harms in terms of
reducing free expression privacy for people of all ages,
access to key services and community.
Um, so I think it's really important to,
to consider the voices of young people
who often have quite interesting
and nuanced things to say about the,
their experiences online, both in terms
of the different types of harms
that different groups experience,
but also the benefits that are often kind
of lost in this conversation in terms of what people learn
and how they engage and form identity
and form community online.
Um, we also need solutions
that really focus on greater education
and support for young people,
but also for the adults who are looking
to address these new complex problems.
Parents and teachers are not particularly well supported at
the moment to have these conversations
with the young people in their lives.
Um, and of course, platform accountability.
Um, if we steer into these sort of silver bullet bands,
we're actually saying that the platforms don't have
to make spaces safe for young people anymore.
'cause they're not meant to be there. But we know in reality
that it's more complex and people will find workarounds
and there is content that people will still be being driven
to perhaps less regulated spaces.
Um, so that's, that's kind of my main, um, overview
and really happy to take, take any questions.
Thanks so much, Claire. Any questions for Claire?
Very good.
There's no questions, Claire.
Um, I think your presentation was very clear
and thank you for the submission you made.
It was detailed with some clear recommendations as well.
Thank you. But, um, we will now move on
to our next submitter, um, who is Antonio?
Uh, so correct. Yep. Professor Antonia Lawrence.
He's here in person, I think. Yes, yes. Great.
Um, professor to join us, um, at the table here,
we've got you with us for 10 minutes this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
Oh, So whenever you're ready.
Thank you very much. And thank you for the opportunity
for, um, being able to come and speak to our submission.
I just wanna acknowledge that I'm here on behalf
of a whole team of researchers
and we're, we're, um, I'm gonna be talking about a series
of projects that we've done, um, both quantitative,
so survey based research with over 3,700 young people
aged 14 to 20.
And also just to canvas what young people are doing online,
what their social media practices are,
what they see in their feeds.
Um, and then we did, um, more in depth qualitative work
because it was really about finding out
from young people themselves, their own experiences,
their own online world.
Um, and we were particularly interested in the, in the
harmful marketing that they see,
so harmful commodity marketing.
So we asked specifically about alcohol, vapes and tobacco.
Um, that's what we asked about in our survey.
But in our qualitative research, we found a lot more than
that, that they were, um, seeing in their feeds
and that was coming on coming into their feeds.
Um, we also found, so we found, we also found that they, so
I have a particular interest in addiction
because I'm a chair of addiction research,
Hugh Green Foundation Chair of Addiction Research,
and I'm also the director
for the Center for Addiction Research.
So we did ask them about, you know,
whether they felt addicted to the platforms
and they used the platforms a lot.
Um, they, one of the things that was really surprising
for us was that the i median number of platforms
that they use regularly was nine.
And that ranged from, from between one and 19.
Um, so, you know, using a whole range
of different platforms, um, absolutely,
and it's really important to say this, absolutely.
Platforms were generally very positive,
um, parts of their life.
So this is where they learned about
what was going on in their peer
groups, in their family groups.
That's where they got their news from.
It's where they got entertained.
Um, it's where they made connections.
So they spoke really positively about social media
platforms, but they were also very aware
that these were highly commercialized spaces,
and they were very, very savvy.
They know that the platforms are designed using insights
from addiction research.
They could talk about that.
They could talk about how they could see
that they're the product, that the, that their attention
and their data that they provide, the platforms
that they are the product.
And so they knew that by being online
and sometimes feeling like they're
compulsively using the platform.
So they talked about staying on the platforms even though
they didn't wanna stay on that long or being on online eight
or nine hours a day.
Um, they knew that that wasn't good for them,
but they found it hard to stop scrolling.
So, and that's, they talked about the nature
of the platforms.
Um, and I guess for them, the survey showed us how much,
just how much unhealthy commodity marketing they're seeing.
So three quarters of them were seeing alcohol marketing
within their social media feeds regularly.
Um, that's including people who are under 18.
Um, it was about 35, 30 5% of, um,
our survey respondents reported seeing vape marketing.
And the thing about the vape marketing was that that was
reported more by 14 to 17 year olds than 18 to 20 year olds.
So, um, so it's definitely reaching underage users.
It's all self-report.
So it might be that underage users recognize it
and remember it and report it more.
So it, you know, because we had to ask them.
And that's the other thing about these platforms is
that they're completely non-transparent.
So the only way that, you know,
what's happening in young people's social media feeds is
by asking them to tell you about it.
Uh, we did do a digital ethnography where they did, uh, the,
the small group of participants took screenshots
of all the unhealthy commodity marketing they saw in
their feeds across a week.
And then they recorded their screen three times
for 15 minutes at a time, um, at three different times
of the week, twice during the day and once in the evening.
And then they edited those videos
and they showed them to us in a Zoom interview
so we could talk about what they were seeing in real time.
And they were absolute, and,
and it wasn't designed as an intervention study,
but all of those participants said, I can't believe
how much marketing is coming at me in these feeds.
I, you know, I scroll, I scroll, I scroll,
and I kind of sometimes notice it and sometimes don't.
But sometimes, and they, you know, they would stop on an ad
and say, sometimes you can't even tell that it's an ad,
but it is an ad, you know, they are selling wine
or they're selling vodka, or they're selling,
or they're, you know, they've got vapes or whatever.
Um, so yeah, it was the perva pervasiveness
of those commodities that they were seeing in their feeds.
So I guess, yeah, across those studies in,
in the metaverse we found that young people,
or we found that with Roblox.
So Roblox is in, as a metaverse, very popular
with the very young kids.
So primary school age kids play Roblox.
You can go into a bar and you can drink.
So this, uh, one of our participants talked about
how her younger brother, who was 10, sat in the bar
and Roblox and you could drink up to 10 drinks,
and the more you drank the fuzzier your screen got,
so it kind of like made it feel like your avatar was
intoxicated and you'd get off your stool
and stumble and fall over.
So that whole thing is about normalizing alcohol,
but not just alcohol intoxication.
And this is where, you know, this is where young kids
are spending their time
and it's fun, you know, that they're
on Roblox because it's fun.
It's a pleasurable activity.
And so, you know, our teenagers talked about how they had
to try and navigate the system
where they really appreciate all the benefits it gives them.
And you know, they would feel
that there was harm if they had it taken away from them.
But they had to sort of navigate online content
that they didn't wanna see harmful content
and really pervasive, unhealthy commodity marketing,
gambling fast foods, as well as the alcohol
and vapes that we, that we were, um,
particularly interested in the kind of the key parts
of the key things that we talked about in our submission.
So I'm, we do, um, have a couple
of recommendations about what we could do about it.
And it's not, you know, this is something in terms
of unhealthy commodity marketing.
We know that it influences behavior.
We know that it influences the age at which young people
start drinking, how much they drink.
We may when they do drink, um, the same with vaping.
So we have that evidence, what do we do about it?
And that's something that all governments are
around the world are grappling with.
So, um, one of the things we really
strongly think should be that we don't have
to ask young people for what they see in terms
of marketing within their feeds,
that these platforms should be much more transparent.
We should be able to know what marketing is happening
and how the, um, algorithms are working to, you know,
go into the feeds of young people who are most vulnerable.
The evidence also shows that, you know,
particular commodities go into the feeds of people at times,
they're most susceptible to them.
'cause that's how AI and algorithms work.
It's about getting the person to click on the link.
Um, so regulating
that digital marketing we think is really important
because we see that as one of the harms that happens
for young people in, in the online world.
Thank you very much. Uh, first question, Vanessa Winick, um,
in previous submissions, um, there's been a, um, suggestion
that potentially the amount of evidence that's required
demonstrate harm is quite high.
And, um, yet the amount
and the types of evidence that's used to demonstrate, um,
benefit or, you know, positive attributes of, um,
the online world is, is basically just anecdotal reporting
of people's experience and how much they like it.
Um, so in skewing the, um, the conversation around
what is harm versus the benefits, um,
in some ways there's been a discussion, some have suggested
that some platforms are behaving similarly
to the tobacco industry.
Mm-hmm. Do you think that that is a fair way
of describing it, or do you think that it's hyperbolic?
Um, I agree with, so, um,
some researchers have have written about social media.
The social media industry is a
commercial determinant of health.
Mm-hmm. And I completely agree with that.
I think it's a commercial determinant of health
for all kinds of reasons.
The, the, these authors had written about
seven different Yeah.
Reasons why it affects the health
and wellbeing of our population, not just our young people,
but our population.
And, um, one of those is digital marketing
of unhealthy commodities.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Yeah. So just, I'm very keen
to understand about the feed that you have talked about
that these young people were getting,
because what happens in my experience is if I go
and Google something mm-hmm.
Next time I'm online, I get, you know, ads related to
that kind of industry or the product.
Sure. So I just want to understand that in your survey,
did you collect that information
that these feeds were prompted
because of any searches done by these young people
before you started collecting the stuff?
No, we didn't ask them specifically about that,
what searching they've done.
But some of them, like the 14
and 15 year olds said that they get alcohol ads
and they've never, they've never been on an
alcohol company page.
They've never, so it's, it's not for them.
It wasn't about their searching.
So the way that the AI works,
so it's AI algorithms which are basically
really broad brush experimentation.
So get it out to as many people as you can get it and see,
and see who yeah, who even who slows down on it.
Yeah. It's the, that's
A different point. So what I was
trying to understand is if you have any
information about how many of them actually went
and searched that thing before,
Not from the survey.
So some of the people in the friendship group talked about
how it wasn't actually them Googling, but how they talked
and their phone was in the room and Siri probably heard
and then they kept getting ads for this.
Yeah, they talked about that in the friendship group.
Thank you about that. Yeah.
Thank you very much for the time
you've given us this afternoon.
Um, really appreciate you coming here and,
and being present, uh, face to face with us as well.
Thanks very much. Thanks so much.
Um, members, we're now moving
to Kay Jones who's here with us in the room.
Sorry, Kira. I see some familiar faces here.
Yes. Okay. I think we've got, uh, five minutes
with you this afternoon, including any time
for questions. So I'll go straight over to
You. Yes.
So as you may know, I'm a parent, um,
a former policy advisor who's worked on censorship
and I am also a former member
of the digital technology sector.
I've worked at the office of the Privacy commissioner,
so I've got a, and I'm currently a community volunteer.
Um, so I've got a, a wide range
of background sort of in these areas.
Um, and I just want to cover a, a few points.
One is that I acknowledge all the potential harms
that people can be subjected to through, um, social media.
Not just young people, older people as well.
Um, but also I think there has not been
as much scoping of some of the positives.
And I'll touch on a couple of those.
But also what I would like
to see is the broader discussion of
how social media platforms are closer to
broadcasting channels than to, um,
products in their own right.
It would be great if we could have more regulation
of online platforms,
not just online content
and following what's happening in Australia
where the appointment of the eSafety commissioner
who is going to be enforcing rules from December this year,
means that they are looking at what the platforms are doing
and what their controls are
and asking more questions, including the Roblox
and Lego Play and various other, um, platforms about
how they control what is on those areas.
So it's a bit like, um,
when I was working on indecent publications, um,
back in the day, what are the standards for publication?
What is the responsibility of the broadcaster publisher,
or in this case social media platform?
The appointment, as many people have suggested
of an eSafety commissioner to cover the regulation,
would enable those international discussions
with other jurisdictions that are dealing
with exactly the same issues that our people are to try
and say, how can we actually make them enforce
what is currently an R 13 status for meta already
that is not on it.
Mm-hmm. So whether we are going to, um, recommending
that meta have R 16, which I would actually argue against
for a range of reasons,
but that whole thing of it needs to be not just
outer on New Zealand, which is, you know,
really great, but still small.
And these are international platforms.
So I really, um, recommend that appointment
of regulator be part of it,
but also given what's happening in Australia as well
as other places, the what the committee comes up
with doesn't need to be put into force
until there's a bit more evidence about what works.
Because once you've passed legislation, it's harder
to change it if you have something simple and broad
and giving somebody the risk, ch the opportunity, um,
to discuss with others, whether it be adding on to the, um,
privacy commissioner
or some other, um, official
to actually engage with those things.
I'd really, um, sort of en, en encourage that.
But I also remember taking a step back
as a parent when I was teaching my son
to cross the road safely, you know, I had to do those steps
of walking through what the rules are, what
to watch out for and do that.
And over time, yes, walking to school by himself
and then later on it wasn't a question of saying, oh,
we can't let you anywhere near the road
because the road is not safe.
It's a question of how can you use it safely?
So I echo also those people have talked about having digital
technology education within schools
and with bringing, um, more critical thinking
so that people can learn how to use ad blog
and recognize sponsored on Facebook means it's an advert.
Um, and those things, I'm just gonna briefly read, uh,
one paragraph if I could.
Social media platforms are
where some young people are motivated to develop skills
that will enable them to work to gain work in future,
whether through game development
or building communities and other skills.
This is from a couple of years back, an example from Twitter
and Tumblr at the height of boy band.
One Directions fame showed
that the second largest online community worldwide
was young women, teenage girls, uh, who as fans learn
to develop tech skills for fandom.
Now that was from a speech
that Sasha Judd digital technologist gave at Webstock
conference on how do we encourage young people,
especially girls, to take up digital technology
as an area to work in
because it's no good saying this is somewhere
that we want to keep you away from.
And then at the same time say, oh, we want you to be working
and using digital technology.
Where's the motivation to learn how to use it safely?
If you're saying to young people, this is an unsafe space
and another unintended consequence.
So, and maybe that'll be the final one for a question.
If you enable measure
and other platforms to say, Hey, this is an R 16 space,
there are no people on it who are under the age, then
that just gives free reign to predators, scammers, promoters
of anything that they're trying to, to push
because they can say, oh, we kept them off.
So any young person signing up is not our responsibility.
So that's where I go back to,
you've gotta put the pressure on the platforms
through those international links. Thank you,
Ruben. Any questions?
Yeah, look, thank you very much.
I had a question which was around exactly
that final point you made on the R 16, um, exclusion, and
therefore you're creating a platform that's
by default rated as R 16.
So thank you for answering that.
Yep, thank you.
Thank you so much for your time this afternoon. Thank you.
Um, and coming to present to us in person. Appreciate it.
Appreciate. It's very good. Yes, it's possible I
may be back for another bill.
Oh, it's been a busy year, as we all know. Yes. Yeah.
Um, members, we are running ahead.
Um, and we have no others in this block, so
that means we're gonna be back here at 2:00 PM
and Member McCullum is gonna withdraw his objections from
earlier in the day regarding the chairs management of time.
Um, but on a, on a, on a serious note, um,
we'll be back in the room at, um, two o'clock.
Thank you.
Okay, everyone, we are back, um, in session, we are
starting with the Wellington Community Justice Project.
We're here with us in person, um, who we have
for 10 minutes, including any time for questions.
Gemma and Emily over you.
Awesome. Thank you very much.
So, URA, my name is Emily Rowan,
and my friend with me is Gemma Benon.
And we are volunteers from the Wellington
Community Justice Project.
Uh, thank you for accepting our oral submission.
On behalf of the Justice Project,
we are a student volunteer initiative from the law school at
TE Waka as an organization run by
and for Vanga Tahi.
The CJP would like
to give our perspectives on the harm we know has suffered
online and argue in support of stronger regulations
for online spaces and obligations on social media providers.
So we will begin briefly, uh, canvassing some
of the harmful behavior
and experiences which await young people online.
We have discussed this quite extensively
in our written submission.
So, by way of practical example, we would like
to describe some
of the things we have seen online this
month as young people.
Uh, so we have seen closeup footage
of Charlie Kirk being shot, uh, Palestinian family begging
for donations, footage of starving Palestinian children,
hospital bombings and other atrocities committed daily
by the IDFA video amounting to porn.
A graphic video of someone in a horrific accident,
a video promoting the misinformation from RFK Junior about
vaccine safety and claims at that Tylenol.
Is the cause of autism a direct message from someone, uh,
spouting hate speech, asking uncomfortable questions
or demanding sexual photos?
More prevalent if you're a woman gender queer,
or from a minority group,
A male podcaster claiming women are submissive by nature,
a female wellness blogger,
spreading misinformation about balancing your hormones,
how much protein the body needs,
and how to lose weight in unsafe ways.
So within these examples, there are instances
of online abuse, the widespread availability of sexualized
and traumatic content, the perpetuation of hate speech,
and the promotion of unhealthy stereotypes
and misinformation regarding health and wellness.
Of course, social, uh,
online spaces are not always filled with this type of content.
Young adults use social media in particular
to stay in contact with friends, to follow creators
who inspire and reflect their personalities
and to use these spaces to relax and unwind.
But the potential for harm in online spaces has grown
massively even in the last few years.
The WCJP are concerned about the impact this is having on
the wellbeing of our young people.
Um, in terms of solutions, the WCJP believe the best thing
that government, businesses
and society as a whole can do is support the
regulation of these online spaces.
We believe that the 2023 report by the Department
of Internal Affairs after the Christchurch Mosque attacks
scrapped in 2024, which called for an independent body, uh,
to regulate online safety, promote online safety,
to set minimum standards within social media companies,
and as well as set legal obligations should be reinstated.
You believe regulation is the solution, not only
because it can provide clarity around the types of content
that is acceptable online, but also
because it is the various thing
that the company's responsible
for this harm are afraid that we should do.
Meta, for example, right now is scrambling
to prove on their own terms
and through their own metrics that things such
as teen accounts in Australia, on Instagram
and Facebook are viable options to this issue.
However, they avoid appropriately handing reports
of harmful content because it does not violate their
community guidelines or fit within their
administrative structures.
And we cannot rely on companies
who are destroying our attention spans,
profiting off misinformation
and desensitizing our youth to the worst of human violence,
to be the ones adequately regulating themselves when their
profit margins are on the line,
having advocated for better regulation.
However, the WCJP are not in favor of a social media ban
for under 16 year olds.
As previously mentioned, online spaces
and social media when properly regulated can be extremely
useful tools for youth to unwind,
but also to stay updated in 2025.
Much of our ability to access the news
and a young person's democratic awareness
is possible via social media.
Many grassroots movements depend on social media
because young people are not only able
to inform one another, but organize in online spaces.
A ban therefore threatens to silence political dissent
and awareness amongst our patient.
At Ranga Tahi, freedom of speech is often raised as an issue
regarding social media regulations.
But when it comes to the wholesale removal
of a young person's ability
to participate in online discourse, the dub CJP,
that this consideration almost, but fully disappears.
Finally, and we want to emphasize this, a ban saves strongly
of victim blaming to have introduced these incredible tools
to younger generations only to remove them.
Having failed to implement
and enforce even the most basic online protections,
feels reactionary and not at all interested in confronting
the deeper issue that no person irrespective
of the age deserves
to encounter this sort of content online.
Thank you. That is all from our
submission, and we'll take questions.
Thanks Very much. Any
Questions, Ji? Yeah,
very quick clarification.
So, um, you, as you're saying, um,
that it should be about content, um, moderation,
and we heard from a previous submitter that, um,
the authority to decide, right,
and what is not right should not be left to, um,
social media platforms.
Mm-hmm. Uh, what do you have to say to that?
Uh, yeah, I'd agree with that.
I don't think, as we said, if you've got
your profit margins on the line, if you know
that currently you're profiting more
and more off young people's attention span.
So the longer we spend online, the longer
and the more profit companies like Facebook make.
I don't think companies like
that are very much interested in
regulating their own online spaces.
They're doing very well from it,
and I think it's time for, for government
and like business to recognize that and to kind of step in
and say, Hey, you can't use our young people in this way.
I would also like to add as well that this type
of content will also go, and it will go
and encourage forms of engagement in the form of likes
and comments from people.
Any engagement, sorry.
Any engagement would be considered good engagement
because it goes and it increases the amount
of time people are spending on these platforms in which then
they can go and they can receive money from people
who advertise on these platforms.
So unfortunately,
we do not think it is within our best interests
to leave it solely to social media providers to go
and regulate when it is very clear
they have failed to do so. Okay.
I have a sub, but we don't have time.
Grant McCollum. Yeah.
I'm a bit confused. So, one hand, you don't want
under sixteens a blanket ban,
but you do want protections.
Mm. Right? Mm-hmm. Don't you see a bit of a conflict?
No. No. Not, not at all. No.
No one currently you can witness.
I saw Charlie Cook being shot in the head. Yeah.
As soon as I woke up that morning.
A 16-year-old does not deserve to see that,
but neither does my grandmother, neither does,
neither does anyone else online
and the band for 16 year olds, it's like saying, well,
we've created this, you know, this online space
where you can do all these things and say all these things,
but then to suddenly come along and say, oh, no, actually,
because we, you know, as adults, we've failed to kind
of put in the necessary, and we're not even, like,
the protections we're arguing for are not
even scratching the surface.
Like, to remove violent content
to remove the headings from online would be
just scratching the surface.
But I'll come back for sub.
So I'm gonna go around 'cause I
didn't get Palm Shoot one either.
I'm trying to get through all four of that. Yeah. Um, Ruben,
Thank you. And look,
thanks for excellent.
Um, uh, deputation, just to clarify the,
you gave some really good tangible examples of the kind
of harms that we see online,
and I'm sure you're suggesting this.
I just wanted to clarify. You're suggesting that kind
of content's harmful to everyone,
not just people under the age of 16?
Yes. We would consider it to be harmful to
anyone of any age.
Seeing this type of content is extreme.
It is also dehumanizing, and it is very tragic
because it will go and it will portray very extreme
and harsh situations in basically
ten second formats,
and then suddenly you're expected to move on with your day.
And I believe that that would be harmful
to any human being really.
Yeah, I agree. Thank you. Um, Francisco,
Uh, thank you chair. Um,
just wanting to check, uh, you know, obviously you've,
you've made the opposition against
blanket bands loud and clear.
Um, but what about things like age gating?
Um, you know, for example, uh, you know, we,
we already have age gating, uh, for example, like, you know,
children are not allowed to watch R 18 movies, for example.
So would you support a system of age for the internet,
or do you regard that as a form of a ban as well?
I think potentially fine, potentially how you manage it.
Like 13 year, right now, we have a, you're not supposed
to be on Instagram, Facebook if you're 13 years old.
That kind of makes sense in some ways.
But I think the issue is in the way Australia has been
rolling it out in particular right now,
it's just we feel it's too blunt, it's too reactionary.
But then on the flip side, we don't want
companies like Facebook and Instagram saying, oh,
well we've, we've changed our policy
and we've got a sort of regulation system that works.
Because if they're the only ones assessing it
by their own metrics, then that's,
that's not trustworthy either.
I think we just want a little more oversight from people
who are not profiting off youth attention
span to be overseeing this.
I think also another thing to add as well is that a really,
really good example of a failure of age gating is,
um, YouTube kids.
I'm pretty sure everyone is very well aware of
that form of YouTube.
Um, we have actually seen people come out, um,
with investigations on the algorithm of YouTube kids.
And it is very clear that better reporting systems
and content reporting systems have to be in place
because even these places, which report
that they should have safe content
and algorithm for children's are still showing, um,
quite severe content to them.
Like, for example, you do get these very frightening AI
videos that start off with rather adorable cats,
and then suddenly it turns into quite a tragic
and rather awful story that I don't think any child
or adult should be, uh, exposed to.
So I think in that situation here, I don't think
that age gating is the best solution
and we should be aiming to furnish it further.
Thank you so much for your very considered submission.
Um, and for coming to present the committee today.
I think one of the points that we should take away
as well is when we talk about young New Zealanders,
it's not necessarily divine defined by the age 16.
You know, the, there is that piece of mm-hmm.
Uh, members Bill, considering that,
but Young New Zealanders is a wider brief than just,
uh, any particular age.
But thank you for, um, joining us.
That's all we've got time for this afternoon.
Um, we're now gonna move to, uh, next gen leader,
um, youth Academy
or Youth Leadership Academy who are on Zoom.
Um, and we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon.
So, uh, Danny, if you can jump straight in,
including any time for questions.
Great. Kiara, my name is Danny Ula,
founder of Next Gen Leader.
So I work with Ran Tahi, um, age 13 to 18 in high schools
and communities across the bay of Plenty.
We help them grow in confidence and influence.
I've got one of our young leaders here, Anna Sears.
She is, um, 15 and she's gonna be sharing for a minute
or two her, um, personal viewpoint at the end,
and we'll hopefully have time for questions.
So, look, I, through my work
and interacting with these young people, I see firsthand,
um, the emotional, mental toll
that social media is having on our Ran tahi.
I wanted to share though, um, specific, um, stories
that we've, we've had and, and experiences.
So we take our young people away on a two night adventure
camp, um,
and we tell them not to bring their phone so
that they can engage with each other and the program.
And initially they all complain
and moan about losing their Snapchat streaks,
but by the end they discover, wow, I've had
so much fun without my phone, without being on social media.
And for many of them, that's the longest period
that they've been off, you know, phone and social media.
Um, on another note, we, with all this conversation
around age gating, we interviewed 50 teens
and asked them this question,
would you recommend social media
to a younger sibling turning 13?
Um, and the average? And we said, look, one, not at all.
You know, you're not recommending it. 10 highly recommended.
And the average score was three out of 10.
And so that's a telling sign of where young people are at
and what they think of social media.
Mm-hmm. And recently, I'm not sure if any
of you have watched Patty Goer's show, um,
that Pat Goer has issues.
Um, he did an open conversation
with our young people about social media.
Um, honor was on there
and they Expre expressed deep concern about, um,
viewing pornography.
AI generated deep fake, um, synthetic porn,
so it's not real, which included images of their peers, um,
and harmful content
and all of this without them searching for it.
One young person said simply, you don't have to find
s porn on social media.
It finds you. Um,
and so some argue that age verification
or gating risks limiting freedom of speech,
but freedom of speech must never come at the
cost of youth safety.
If a 13-year-old is fed porn
or violent content, we must ask, is that freedom
or is it a failure to protect?
And do young people really have freedom
of mind when an algorithm decides what they see, think,
and feel, and who is shaping their beliefs and behaviors?
Is it us or is it a machine optimized for engagement?
So we're not limiting freedom, we are reclaiming it
for those who can't defend themselves.
So our solution
and recommendation to the committee is to act decisively
and raise the minimum age verified, um, age gating
to be 16 for social media.
And we've seen age gating, um,
or for in the UK results for, you know, like PornHub
where it decreased by 50% overnight.
Um, but we think that that's not enough.
You need an eSafety commissioner with real time, you know,
with real powers that they can enforce, um, penalties and,
and, you know, um, consequences for people misbehaving.
And I feel like we are, you know, 10 years behind some
of these other places, Australia, uk,
even Fiji has an eSafety commissioner.
And so we really need one
because they will help, um, you know, just plug any holes
that do come up of or or side, you know, things that come up
after say we gate social media.
And, um, finally, I think we need the education.
Um, so funding something additional digital wellbeing
program for whanau, um,
and in schools for, um, young people.
So I believe this is not censorship, it's prevention.
It's about protecting our young people's identity,
confidence, and mental health.
And we must prioritize safety over profit
and wellbeing over algorithm.
So I'm gonna hand over to Anna.
She's got a, um, she's gonna share her point of view.
Go ahead, Anna.
I am 15 years old
and I'm here to persuade you to make a change for our youth.
When I was asked by Danny if I'd recommend social media
to a younger sibling, my answer was a definite no.
As developing teenagers, we're in the phase of life
where we're trying to find our identity
and who we are as individuals.
And I believe social media clashes
and negatively impacts that
because of all the influence, false truth, propaganda
and stereotypes you find on social media.
As a woman myself, I have seen women being objectified
and labeled as if they aren't humans.
And I find it absolutely disgusting
that young women like me, young teen women like me, have
to experience it from constant comparison
to unrealistic expectations.
It shapes how we see ourselves often in harmful ways.
Social media is really toxic for young teens
who are still developing.
As some people fall into that trap of influence
and start to ask themselves, why don't I look like that?
Or I wish I looked like them, including myself,
who has also had a negative experience
with social media and mental health.
Social media isn't just a fun place to connect.
It's extremely addictive
and it exposes us to bullying deep fakes,
inappropriate content
and anxiety about who we should be,
how we should look, and how we should act.
It affects how we feel, how we think, and how we behave.
Therefore, we need you as the committee to step in
and protect us.
Things like introducing age verification,
appointing a real commissioner with real power to act
and provide education for both us as youth
and our parents so
that we can safely navigate this digital world without the
risk of safety and mental health.
Please, we are begging you do not let another generation
grow up feeling unsafe, unseen, and unprotected online.
And the time is, at the time to act is now.
I'm not just asking, I'm urging you to do what's right
for all of us as youth and as growing teens
and for the next generation.
Thank you. Right.
Yeah, thanks. That's very, um, it's great
to get your point of view.
Thank you very much. I'm just curious, uh,
sorry, get your name again.
The young girl. I'm not, not Danny
Honor. Yeah,
Sorry, honor.
Honor. Thank you. Thank you honor.
Hey, um, like you're saying that we need to ban it
and you would like us effectively
to ban it front of 16 year olds.
Why, I mean, what's stopping you from saying, I don't want
to be part of that and just not utilizing it?
I'm just curious from your point of view.
Could you elaborate more on that? Yeah,
Well, well, why don't you just say, no,
I don't wanna have him do social media,
therefore I'm not going
to go onto the platforms at all. Full stop
Yourself.
I, I believe that it's not just
like a personal experience.
I have like this empathy that we need to make a change
as like a whole generation and not just me.
And I believe that I can be the voice for that.
And of course I could be like,
I don't wanna like involve myself in that
and be on social media,
but it's not just, it's not just me that's going through it.
Like there are others that are around my age that are going
through those types of things.
And I just believe that if I have the voice to
speak up about it than I should.
Yeah. A very quick final question from Reuben.
Thank you. Um, yeah, thanks Danny. Thanks. Thanks, Anna.
Question for you, Anna is really, um,
Danny talked about the question being,
would you recommend it to a younger sibling?
And you've talked about being 15.
So my question is, would you recommend social media in its
current form to an older sibling, someone who's over 16?
Over 16? I mean, it's,
I guess it's different in a way because they're a lot older
and more mature and they can make their own decisions,
but I still wouldn't because it's not safe
and it's not, it's just, it's just a dangerous place to be.
And I feel like that's, it's just not beneficial.
Thank you so much honor. Thank you Danny.
Appreciate you taking the, the time to join us today.
Um, thank you. Appreciate you so much.
We're gonna invite the light project, uh, Nikki's with us.
I think I just saw her there for Nikki.
You can turn your video, um, and your mic on.
That'd be much appreciated. There we go.
We've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
Over to you
Koto. I'm Nikki from
the Light Project
and we specialize in young people, pornography
and digital sexual environments.
Um, I'll start by saying thank you
and I to talk with the government
for undertaking this inquiry.
We are certainly in a unique and unprecedented time.
Um, as a digital revolutionist fundamentally reshaped the
landscape of childhood
and adolescence, responding effectively will require a cross
sector innovative and collective response.
So I, I welcome the opportunity to be part of it.
And now we have a generation of wonderful digital natives,
many of whom understand their digital world better
than the adults around them.
It's where they learn, explore, connect,
and tech is now irrevocably woven into their daily lives.
While this has created significant opportunities,
it's also introduced risks and harms.
So over the past seven years, the like projects,
COPA has been centered on understanding
and examining these risks and their real world impacts,
and importantly on how we can prevent or mitigate them.
So that work is what's informed our submission,
which I'll take has read.
And I'll just briefly touch on three key points
so we can move into questions.
First is that much of the inquiry discussion has been
centered around what are term acute harm
that occur either on
or within platforms, image-based abuse, grooming, bullying,
and some of the mental health issues related
to social media usage.
But what's received little attention are the broader
systemic harms that we are seeing.
These are shaped online,
but generally play out offline,
particularly around violence.
So for example, the digital sexual,
the digital world now is a primary source of sex education
for Ahi.
And the normalization
and permeation of violence within it is shifting
and shaping young people's real life attitudes
and experiences of violence.
So the services we work
with right across the country are seeing these
shifts in practice now.
So things like increasing acceptance of sexual aggression
and relationships, a significant rise in sexual harm
and escalating presentations of practices such
as rough sex and choking.
So these systemics harms have been poorly
recognized within this kind of online harm discussion
that do carry profound implications for ero,
particularly against the backdrop
of our current rising sexual violent rates.
Second point is, despite the in inquiry's intent
to examine sort of the wide scope of online harm,
significant attention has, has fallen into social media
and age restrictions.
And I guess this is concerning for us.
You know, we are seeing rapidly emerging harms occurring
across a vast range of platforms, far beyond social media
messaging apps, porn sites, gaming sites,
digital communities, livestream media.
And an increasing part
of our work at the moment is all the AI driven platforms
such as the companion apps, young people's digital
ecosystem is really vast and it's evolving
and highly complex.
So I guess we'd caution against narrowing this inquiry
to a single set of platforms and
or a one dimensional response.
Finally, we support a strong broad systems level response
to online harm that our submission did emphasize.
One critical aspect, which is workforce capability.
And that's because national scoping projects have revealed
right throughout the country what we describe as profound
or crucial gaps and workforce knowledge and skills.
Most sectors describe feeling ill-equipped to recognize,
prevent, or respond to online harm.
So while the digital environment is evolving at
extraordinary speed, the reality is that we, the adults,
government services, government policy makers tasked
with being the guardians of young people,
have simply not kept pace.
And as a result, we're seeing young people being left
to navigate this very complex landscape with little
to no meaningful protection, guidance, or support.
So in summary, we believe we need
to urgently build capability
and adopt a youth centered systems level approach
to online harm, spanning regulation, education, legislation,
workforce development,
and importantly community youth engagement.
And it's will only be through taking this kind
of broader approach that will actually be able
to effectively protect, guide, and equip young people
and their communities to safely navigate the digital world
and live lives free from harm.
Thank you. I'll take questions.
Thanks very much, Nikki.
Question from Grant McCullum. Yeah,
Hi. Thanks Nikki. Um,
just from your experience, um, uh,
we've got the social media companies are trying to tell us
that they're actually working hard
to take away those harmful
or pornographic images, for example,
that young people might come across.
Is that, is it,
what's your experience it in be observing that area?
Is that happening or not?
No, we are seeing a, a strong permeation of, if we think
of porn, let's say as just, um, sexual content
that's been created with the intent to arouse an audience.
We are seeing that now, right across
all platforms young people engage in.
So that's social media, that's gaming platforms, that's ai.
So right across all the platforms, including social media,
you can report stuff.
And, and we've noted a quick response in terms
of taking that down.
Not always, but it still sits on there.
And that's largely just
because of the sheer amount of content that's
that's on there and the, the inability to have the number
of moderators to oversee that in terms of
how much content is on there and what they can take down.
Mm-hmm. Thanks Grant.
Nikki, you make the point well
that the in inquiry's intention is wider than just the
social media platforms.
And, um, we, we continue to remind ourselves that
through the process, what would be your number one thing you
believe, uh, New Zealand could do to address some
of those online harms related to the non-social media, um,
app component of this inquiry,
Developing a national strategy, for example,
for online harm
and rolling that out, whether
that's having a children's online safety act,
children's online commissioner center for online harm,
I think is a starting point
because we have currently, you know, for example,
there's no integration of, of online harm across any
of our national youth health, family violence,
sexual violence, education strategies, and
therefore it's not rolled out in policy and practice.
So as a starting point,
and then crucially is supporting the adults in our,
so that's parents, communities and the workforce.
You know, our, our health, family violence, sexual violence,
justice, social services have
extremely low knowledge and understanding.
So how do we support families and communities
and young people themselves without that as a,
as a really important starting point.
Okay. Any other questions from any members?
No, thank you, Nikki. Appreciate the time you've taken
to present to us, uh, and for your submission. You're
Welcome. Thank you.
So, um, if we can now invite my mahi, Jeff King, um,
who's here with us to join us at the table for 10 minutes,
including, um, any time questions.
Jeff, over to you. Thank you. Good, everyone? Yeah.
So my name's Jeff King.
I'm the co-founder of my mahi, uh,
educational technology product.
We work with, um, schools across New Zealand
and and Australia.
The reason for my submission was that within the media,
there were comments that it wasn't possible to,
to make the changes
or the restrictions that needed, um, to be made to ensure
that young people were kept safe.
Uh, we were involved in the Australian age assurance trial,
uh, as the, the only New Zealand company that made it
to the final stage of live testing, um, with participants.
So essentially what happened is you went through, uh,
made a submission at the beginning,
and then you, you had interviews
and then you had further submissions and,
and further interviews.
And then finally made it to the last stage of, of trialing
with a, with a lot with an audience.
Um, in our case, it was a school in Victoria.
Um, so those students used our solution
and went through the, um, went through the, the different,
the mechanisms that they had put in place.
Essentially what that was is the students were
to enter social, a social media,
a fake social media platform.
Then they would use the My Mahi solution,
which essentially is a, a digital ID card.
Um, think of like your plastic ID card,
but in a, in a digital format, what our product does is
we use a, a technology called selected disclosure, meaning
that the students don't,
or anyone who uses the product,
they don't send the whole information.
Um, because that, you know, a key fundamental
for the product is about around, um,
minimizing digital footprint
and, um, obviously select disclosure.
The idea is that you only send the
information that they need.
So before a young person sends what we, you know,
is essentially a token, think of a,
or you know, something that says I'm 16
or over, they send that to the social media company
before they send that they do a biometric match
with their school photo to ensure that the person using
that, um, or sending that token is the,
is the owner of the token.
Uh, the idea there is
that no one is exposing any information
that the social media company doesn't need to know.
All they need to know is that they're 16
and they can lead them through.
So we participated in that
and that was the solution that we used.
Uh, we received, we were the only organization to, uh,
to do, uh, over 50, uh, participants
and receive a hundred percent accuracy on
all those participants.
So what we can do is we can assure that when a student is 15
and 364 days old, they'll not get into social media and
or any other, any other platform.
And then once they turn 16, they'll have,
um, access to that.
And that's slightly different from some of the other methods
that you may have heard about in the media.
Think of what, uh, the media covered a lot
of was age estimation, which if you're familiar with that,
it takes a biometric of your, of your face, uh,
and then it estimates how old you are.
The problem with that, um, if you've seen the report is
that, uh, the closer you get to the age gate, say 13, uh,
16 and 18, the less accurate the age, uh,
the age estimation talk becomes.
Um, and so what they talk about is,
I'm not sure whether Tony mentioned this this morning in,
in his, um, address,
but they have a waterfall method where you have inference,
age inference, for example.
Um, uh, a platform can see
how long have you had a a Google account
or a Facebook account, do you have a credit card, et cetera.
So they know that you are over 18, you know,
if you've had a Gmail for 20 years, they, you know, they,
they infer that you are over the, over the age
of 16, 18 or 13.
So they can make that inference. Uh, then they flow down.
If they can't make that inference,
they go to age estimation.
And then from age estimation, they go to age verification.
So they use some form of, um, government ID in Australia.
That's what they're looking at
at the moment, if you've seen that.
Uh, or they use something like your bank account
and they use that a strict kind of, um, da data point
to, to fix your age as to as to what it is.
And MAHI is unique in the fact that we use the school as
that data point, um,
and we use the data of birth that
that comes through the school system.
Um, and the students can use that ID to safely engage with,
um, any kind of tech platform.
Um, and so that's kind of the solution that, that,
like I say, we've used, um,
we've also trialed it here a a little bit, not in terms
of the age estimation,
but in terms of tertiary enrollment and things like that.
So these sorts of technologies, there's,
there's broader benefits than just age, um, age assurance.
There, there are a whole lot of other things
that can be done, particularly in relation to that, uh,
selected disclosure functionality if you want to, to see
that someone is a, is a student, for example,
so they can get some kind of, uh,
student concession on transport or whatever.
You can just show that, uh, send the third party, uh, uh,
a credential, uh, token that says I'm a student.
Meaning they don't, again,
they're not sharing all that data.
They're not sending, you know, passports or driver's license
or anything else over the internet to,
to different organizations
and have that risk of, um, of some kind of identity fraud.
I think one of the, one of the things
that we're seeing at the moment, and I'm not sure whether
you're aware of this in New Zealand,
but things like roadblocks, asking young people to, uh,
if they want to use certain functionality, for example,
a chat feature, asking them to show id, uh,
I was con contacted by someone just the other day
who said their daughter took a photo of their pass
of her passport and sent it off to, to Roblox.
Um, and this is the kind of risky behavior
that we also don't wanna see, you know, has
to be any solution that we come up with that we work
with has to be privacy preserving.
Um, and I think someone said earlier about the educational
piece that has to be really strong, not just
for young people, but also for appearance as well,
because it's a, it's a really new kind of,
um, world out there.
Uh, you know, age assurance can be done safely, um,
and it can be done, um, it can be done well,
it can be robust and it can be secure,
but we, you know, there's an education piece like I say,
that has to be, um, worked in as well.
Great. Uh, question from Vanessa.
Um, so we heard from an earlier submitter about some
of the, um, possible solutions
and, um, um, they mentioned, um,
token systems and double blinding.
Yep. Um, is that essentially what your system Yeah, yeah.
Does That's exactly right.
Um, is it only linked to
or does the system, yours is specific for, um,
school information,
but it could be any government information?
Yeah. Any, any, That's right. For example, if we were
to bring in a, um, a digital, um, driver's license.
Yeah. So that's, yeah.
So exactly the idea would be is they,
they use selected disclosure for a driver's license and
therefore they send through the only the age, you know,
again, not even the age.
Yeah. Just the credential saying I'm over 16,
or if it's like the UK it's I'm over 18
or whatever else. Yeah. Yeah,
That's right. Great. Thank you.
In terms of the way your, uh, technology works,
is there an option to put the expectation on the social
media platforms or websites for that, uh, matter
to be responsible for how they individually choose
to verify the age of users as opposed
to a sort of national standard?
Yeah, I, I, I think, you know, in terms of, you know,
whether, I'm just obviously seeing a lot
of what's happening in Australia
because we've still got involvement
with what's going on there.
They, there are certain guidelines in terms of
what the expectation is from the eSafety
commissioner about how it works.
Um, and then there will be, you know,
obviously the, the switch gets flicked on December the 10th,
and everyone has to, you know, there will be HH station, uh,
you know, for a lot of different people across a lot
of different platforms.
Um, in terms of how it's done, I think they're leaving it up
to the social media companies and using those guidelines.
And again, there's some pretty hefty fines there
for them if they don't, don't comply.
So, um, but from the sounds of it, there will be a,
you know, there'll be a period where they are allowed
to kind of work
with those different solutions that they've got.
Um, and then they're obviously not,
the eSafety commissioner is not enforcing which solutions
they choose to use, so they can use
a range of different ones.
Um, and so we've been talking with a, a, a number
of different companies about how we,
how we could work together to, to be a solution for it.
So, sorry, just to clarify, you were shortlisted by,
by the commissioner?
Yes. But then it's up to the companies
to determine if they want to use you?
Yeah, that's correct. So you go through the, go
through the process, you, you go through the, um, the,
the testing, all your reports, uh, uh,
of the testing is all, is all publicly available.
Um, and then social media companies make the decision about
how they want to got it.
How they want to move forward with it.
Yeah. So with your, uh, approach, teachers providing, uh,
basically visual verification of, um, students, that seems
to be quite invasive for STU teachers to provide
that on regular basis to ensure
that the photo remains current.
No, that's, that's
what happens every year in a school within a student
management system anyway, you know, um,
the a a student when they come in, they need an ID card.
So that system sits with that,
that photo sits within the student management system.
Yeah. And again, you know, new students come in,
they need photos every day.
Those photos are seen by the teachers.
You know, some classes are quite big,
so they need those photos to know
who which students are, which that's pretty,
But then these photos are sent to you
as another company, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Not just the property of the school, then
That's just like would with a Yep.
And as they would with a plastic card
company as well, that would come through. So
This would require explicit, uh,
explicit permission from students and evidence.
Yep, that's correct. Yep. Yep. That's right.
And there's an optout of students,
if parents don't want the, their students to use
that this system, then they opt out.
And that's what happens now. Yeah.
Thank you so much, Jeff, for the time this afternoon.
Really appreciate, um, you sharing
your experience with the committee.
Thank you. Now we have, uh, we young on Zoom.
We, we have five minutes with you this afternoon,
including time for questions Over to you.
All right. Thank you. Kiara Chairperson members on the
select committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak
to my submission on the inquiry into the harm
of young New Zealanders encounter online,
particularly in ions to the members bill seeking
to protect under sixteens from social media harm.
My name's we Young u I'm based in Auckland.
I'm the executive director of owning it.
It's a live skills program for teens.
I'm a parent of two teenage boys, age 17 and 15.
I bring three areas of experience to this conversation.
Firstly, I've mentored young people for over 20 years,
and I worked professionally in coaching
families for the past 12.
Our charitable business equips teenagers with life skills
and supports their parents.
Secondly, I've nearly a decade of experience in risk
and compliance, including serving as the head of risk
and compliance at Tower Limited.
This means I value both the impact of legislation
and the importance of good practical governance,
clear policies, sound procedures,
and proper funding to ensure legislation is
practical and effective.
And thirdly, I'm also currently a doctoral candidate in the
field of youth, family and culture.
And in fact, I'm in LA right now, uh,
on my one week intensive.
My overarching view is that technology itself is agnostic.
It brings both good and harm.
The challenge before us is to maximize the good
and mitigate the risk.
I'm encouraged that this government is listening to parents,
educators, social media companies,
and young people themselves.
From my observation,
the harms young people face online include sexual abuse
by predators, including catfishing, early exposure
to pornography, leading to distorted views of sex,
heightened social anxiety due to fewer chances
to practice face-to-face communication.
Though I note that for some shy young people,
online spaces can provide the freedom to express themselves
and algorithm driven content
that promotes unrealistic body ideals,
feeding body dysmorphia and eating disorders.
That said, we must be careful not
to dismiss online relationships
as less real than in-person ones.
For many young people, online platforms are their,
their primary space for connection and leisure.
The phrase it takes a village
to raise a child is still true,
but today's village often lacks the strong community ties
or the large backyards that older generations once had.
The online world offers benefits to global connection,
access to information and platforms for advocacy.
When it comes to responsibility,
I believe the primary role lies with parents and whanau.
Yet many are ill equipped
to guide the tamari in the digital world.
This is where government policy
and funding can help empower parents.
At the same time, social media
and tech companies must be held accountable
for minimizing harm on the members'.
Bill proposing a ban on under 16 use of social media,
I would caution that an outright ban is a blunt instrument.
Unlike alcohol or smoking, which have no positive benefits,
social media can be valuable when used safely,
a ban risks pushing young people toward alternative,
potentially more dangerous channels.
So instead, I recommend five key actions.
Number one, to establish a dedicated online safety regulator
with enforcement powers
and overarching protective legislation for miners.
Now, number two, to require technology companies
to pre-install digital safety software on all
devices by default.
Number three, fund parenting education
and practical tools to support whanau and parents.
Number four, invest in a wide range of accessible,
appealing activities for Ranga, tahi,
and tamari, reducing reliance on screens.
Number five, increasing funding
for Ranga Tahi led programs co-designed with young people
to educate and empower their peers,
because youth led solutions are often the most effective.
Thank you for considering my input.
Thank you. Any questions?
We, I think those recommendations were pretty clear.
Uh, thank you for taking the time to present to us, um,
and for your submission
and, uh, trust that your time in LA goes well.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, now we're gonna invite Charlene White.
Charlene, uh, great to see you again.
Thank you for your submission, um, on your petition
to the committee earlier in the year.
Um, look forward to hearing from you again today.
We are with you for 10 minutes, um,
including any time for questions.
Hi, thank you for, uh, asking me
and letting me, giving the opportunity to talk.
Uh, so I am a guidance counselor
for young children in primary schools and high schools.
Um, and from what I've seen, um,
basically lots of students just use
phones a lot or with the young ones.
There are young ones already younger
than 10 that have a phone.
And also they spend lots of time gaming
and there's not much, um, regulations, rules
and regulations from the parents.
And also they have access to everything.
And, uh, what I also find with high school students, um,
that they spend lots
of time in their room on their phone, hours and hours.
Um, nobody knows what they're seeing, looking at,
watching, talking to,
and it's like parents, they allow their privacy,
their kids' privacy, then they share that, that privacy
of their kids with the rest of the world,
which doesn't make sense to me.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I came up with the idea that first
of all, the parents needs to, to have much more, uh,
education with the, with the negative side effects
of social media and
what they are giving when they give a phone to their child,
what they're handing them, you know,
and when they're handing them a phone, it doesn't just,
you hand them a phone and free for all.
It comes. Hopefully it comes with regulations and rules
and consequences and time limits and all of that.
So it feels like, first of all, we have to
have access and education towards the parents
'cause they are the ones who are buying the phones.
'cause I'm pretty sure not, not many kids can afford
to buy a phone, um, not handing a phone
to their kids at such a young age
and have so with the government produces a ban
and have some kind of a law enforced
for the parents to follow.
That would be great. 'cause I think lots of parents would,
would, would need that.
'cause what I find is that lots of kids end up with a phone
because the rest of the kids have a phone
and they don't want to miss out.
So if the majority of parents don't give a phone
to their kids at such a young age, then the majority
of kids don't have a phone
and they don't have suffer from FOMO or even ask for it.
So if we can aim towards having the majority
of parents
and children not having a phone below the age of 16,
that would be ideal because, um, like, uh, the person
before me said the phone is got good tools,
it's got good things, but unfortunately,
if given without any education
and without, um, any restrictions, it can obviously be used,
um, very negatively.
Um, and especially when it's handed to such young minds,
minds and kids being so young that they are still, um,
getting to know who they are, they are still getting
to know this place in the world.
Um, getting to know to have an identity and form an identity
and being bombarded with all the things
that you find online, um, while you're trying to figure out
who you are is messy.
It's messy. Um, and so misleading.
And they have, I I deal with lots of kids
that have low self-esteem.
'cause they're comparing themselves like in our times
and the times before me, you compare yourself
with maybe your school, the students at your school
with the students in your town, um, with your friends.
And that's like what you kind
of get a feel of where you stand.
All of a sudden you're comparing yourself this one person
with the rest of the world,
and not everything's real online either.
So it's the, the bar is so high
that they're never gonna reach.
Their standard is out of, out of limits.
And that's what's causing all this confusion,
low self-esteem, anxiety, depression.
And it's been, um, um, reported
that basically since 2012, between thousand 12
and thousand 15, there has been a real, um, low
and decline in teenagers, um, mental health
and also the loneliness rate is sky high.
So we're supposed to have this tool that connects us
and keeps us and having social, social friends
and be social.
And it's doing the total opposite.
Um, lots of people are preferring
to stay at home on their phone
and everything is, um, based on unrealistic things.
Um, um, so I also came up with the idea to have a license.
Um, so same as we have a driver driver's license for,
for a kid to get behind the wheel and drive.
I really like to compare social media and the phone
and smartphone with a car.
Um, so we expect to give them a tool
and not crash, like when you expect them to give them a car
with no, with no, um, um, rules or with no education
and expect them to arrive at, uh,
plan at point B without crashing.
It's the same thing with a phone.
So I really want to emphasize on the education side
of things, both for parents and children.
So if, um, we can, can have this license,
smart smartphone license or technology license, that
whenever parents would like to
or think about, oh, is my child ready to have a phone?
Um, they will have this online course
that the parents will sit and watch
and get informed of the pros and cons of, of the phone
or tech and the technology
that they're gonna hand out to their kids.
And same with the child.
Before they actually have a phone, they need
to have a smart phone license
or a technology license, which they opt
and get by, by having a workshop and learn about the pros
and cons of, of, of being online
and, um, have a test.
And if they pass, they have a license
and then they can access and have a phone.
Um, at the moment it's, it's messy.
Everyone can, can access basically and, and everything.
And same as the guy
before me said they have access to real adult content
things that once they see it, it's very hard to one, see,
and especially when it comes to pornography
and edit stuff, that's gonna be their first,
that's gonna be their first, um, experience of how, of
what sex looks like or maybe feels like, whatever, um,
because they don't have any other experience.
And I think that that's the way it goes.
So we are, um, confusing
children's minds, um, not having, giving them the time
to even find their own identity, their own self.
And they're being bombarded with so many external factors
that even, even I can be confused if, if I'm not,
if I'm not, um, old enough to, to know what's real
and what's not, let alone someone with such, um, as
with their, their brain development is still at a very
immature stage that they,
it it's very confusing. It's very harmful for them.
Thank you, Charlene. I'll see if there's any
questions from the committee.
No, I think you've, uh, made your point very well, Charlene,
thank you for taking the time
to present the committee this afternoon.
Thank you. Bye. Thank you.
Bye. Uh, we've now got, um, the n emitter has canceled
and we've replaced them with monopoly watch, uh,
who are online.
So Monopoly watch, um, if I can ask you
to turn your video on Thanks text,
and we've got, uh, five minutes with you,
including any time for questions.
Okay. I'm speaking from the office at, uh,
b primary school where I'm picking up my 8-year-old son.
So I've got a hard finish at at three o'clock.
Um, I'll, I'll quickly go through my, uh, details
and then ask her questions.
I've got a unique insight into this problem.
I've, uh, probably built more cell towers than most
people have had hot dinners.
And I've also worked on a undersea internet cable from the
US to New Zealand, where we sold traffic to, uh, access
to major OTT internet players.
Um, this is the select committee's, um, tobacco
and alcohol moment.
You can't put the damage done by internet access
to kids back in the box.
Um, I, I, I need to share with you the experience of of of,
of asking an eng a senior engineer in another country.
While the cell towers kept crashing
over a school area that we built.
We rebuilt a school district,
built a local community, we built cell towers.
And the chief engineer turns around to me
and says, Hey, Tex, the kids get on porn after school.
The school bell breaks so the cell towers can't carry the
traffic, the kids on the school, on, on, on the,
on the cell phone network.
Um, I don't believe this nonsense has been published by,
um, meta Facebook, Google, apple.
Those businesses rely on monopoly market structures
to to, to survive.
They need to what we call, um,
in the industry called engineer network effects,
which means it's a winner take all business case,
and it's not like a tobacco
or alcohol business where you can cut the line
and you can still maintain a monopoly.
The reason why they need these under sixteens on their
infrastructure is it is
so then they're not an available market,
but when they come to market IE they turn 16 years old in
one day, they can join another platform.
I think there's been some other submitters
that have had very sensible control mechanism,
but I think that that control should be worked
through schools, the parents,
and we're not talking about banning the internet
to under 16 year olds.
We are talking about unfettered access
to really negative activities.
Um, if we take a quick look at the fishing industry, the,
the, the model shop, the mudslide shop, the playground,
the afterschool care industry, these are industries that,
that are fertilized on keeping kids off the internet.
If you don't ban internet to under 16 year olds,
you're gonna create a two tier education system.
An education system where, where wealthy kids have been, uh,
been able to go fishing, uh, go to the modern shop,
build the mudslide,
and the other kids that are gonna be brainwashed.
Today as this committee meets there,
there is an adult problem with, uh, internet and smartphones
and social media platforms.
If you go to a building site, um, the chief building
or chief engineer will ask everybody to put their,
to put their, um, phones away
and to prevent distraction in industrial processes
from meetings and things.
You are talking about kids here,
these are under 16 year olds
who don't have fantastic judgment.
Um, I'll, I'll open up for questions.
My, my message is simple.
Uh, we need a ban of, um, internet, social media access
for under 16 year olds.
Uh, we should copy Australia on this matter,
and we should understand the harm that's being done even
with this, even with a, a legislation that,
that prevents access by 16. Any questions?
Thanks Tex. Uh, I've got a question from Phil Twyford.
Oh, good on you. Hi Tex. Uh, thanks for the submission.
Um, uh, here you point around the, uh, the age ban, um,
through your, the lens of someone who's worked on,
um, monopoly busting.
What, what's your perspective on, um,
how the state should approach these
powerful social media companies around, uh, algorithms
and, uh, liability for the harm that they cause?
I appreciate that question
because these are very well resourced, um, uh, monopolies.
And as you'll notice in my submission, I've suggested
that we have, um, the question, um,
that we have a market study
because one of these issues
with these big social media platforms is there should be a,
what we call link tax.
We have a link tax in Canada, the Aussies arranged
for link tax and Aussie, where Murdoch said,
if you're using my news media contact, you have
to pay the news media because that,
that's an adult matter for adult news contact.
But these, these organizations are almost unlimited
resources because it's being just so profitable
to create a advertising monopoly.
So we're talking about these digital platforms having
advertising monopolies, and when we start looking at those
huge numbers, it's to your, to answer your question,
it's absolutely reasonable that you
as legislators would come down heavy on these industries
and, and just put these lobbyists back in their place
because, because they're not spinning the truth.
And sorry, to, to, to, uh,
anchor this important point,
but one of my sort of more points,
if the select committee went to San Trappe
or went to the Hamptons or went to Vineyard the last summer
and hung out on the boats of the owners of these platforms
and your kids swam across to meet their kids, you would see
that the owners of these platforms don't allow their kids
on, on, on the, on the platforms that they're selling.
They need to sell the platform
because they need to entrench
a hundred percent market share. Thanks your question.
Thanks so much. Thanks mate. Uh, te that's all we've got.
Got time for this afternoon. Appreciate you taking the time
to present to the committee.
Thank you for giving me a speaking spot.
And thank you for, uh, taking me as from B Mara Primary.
I'm not speaking on behalf of B Mara Primary.
I'm just a parent. Thank
You. No worries.
Um, we're now inviting Anna Ashton, uh, on Zoom
to present to the committee.
Uh, Kiara, can you hear me? Okay,
Kiara. Anna, we've got
you, uh, this afternoon for five minutes,
including any time for questions over to you.
Thank you. Uh, so my name is Anna Ashton.
I'm 24 years old and I'm a survivor of online harm.
Um, I was manipulated, exploited
and controlled, uh, via social media by a peer,
so some of my own age.
Um, I fell victim to grooming by some older peers
and was drawn into the pro suicide community,
which encouraged me to attempt to take my own life.
I survived thanks to interventions by police,
emergency department, staff specialist,
mental health services and some very special people
who loved me as I was when I needed it the most.
However, 10 years
after these events, I don't think
we have properly addressed the issue.
And nor do I think a social media ban would have saved me.
Um, to me, banning social media for under sixteens would be
as ineffective and stigmatizing
as alcohol bans or prohibition.
For under eighteens, the majority
of New Zealand youth actually drink underage.
Um, and for those of us who are hurt while drinking often
from sexual assault, it can feel impossible to speak up.
Uh, it happened to me and I, I didn't feel I could speak up.
I was scared I'd get in trouble for drinking,
and I didn't wanna be stopped from seeing my friends
or attending social events.
Um, so I told no one. And the guilt and shame ate me alive.
Um, I know that social media bands
for under sixteens would have the same
effect in high school.
I wasn't supposed to use my phone at night,
and yet I did anyway because I wanted to socialize,
but I also wanted distract from the painful
experiences in the real world.
Um, but because I was breaking the rules,
I didn't share about what was
happening online with my family.
'cause I didn't wanna be restricted.
Um, my phone was a lifeline for me at that time.
Um, and I know many other young people had their phones
checked by parents, and it just broke their trust
and made them more effective at hiding things.
And when online harm was discussed in my community, um,
it was mostly in the form of gossip
and, um, shaming, especially women, um, uh, for those
of us silently suffering with similar issues.
It cemented the idea in our heads that we were to blame,
um, that no one would understand.
Our reputations would be ruined,
our families wouldn't look at us the same,
and that we could never, ever tell anyone.
Um, but say you did work up the courage to tell someone
what help actually was there.
Well, unfortunately, there's actually very little, um,
to spec specific to online harm.
So when I tested the waters in high school by talking
to my psychologist about catfishing,
she didn't even recognize the word.
So how could she have helped me?
Um, and 10 years later, we still haven't got a formal, uh,
digital harm literacy training or assessment, um, treatment
and prevention program for healthcare providers.
And as a lived experience advisor
who does systemic improvement in especially mental health
services, I've tried to fill this gap.
Um, but we need a national set of guidelines.
Uh, we need investment and research,
particularly about developing a digital wellbeing assessment
tool, just like we have
for physical and mental health assessment.
Um, we need to identify effective treatments.
We need funding for postvention support services
and education programs for children, youth educators,
and healthcare providers.
I believe the funding for these programs
of work should come from taxing
or charging social media companies just like we
tax alcohol and nicotine.
Um, I really wanna reinforce how important it's
that we take a harm reduction approach, um,
because I'm, I do worry about pushing young people, um, kind
of to more dangerous spaces to meet their needs.
Um, and the digital world is actually part of life.
Uh, young people will actually need to learn how
to navigate it safely at some point.
Um, and prohibition isn't actually gonna protect us.
It just silences our most vulnerable.
Uh, so I want them to be heard, not just at this forum,
but throughout the entire process.
Um, uh, whatever you decide to do.
Uh, I just wanna say nothing about us without us, really.
Thank you.
Thank you, Anna, and thanks for sharing your, uh, story.
I'm gonna ask Vanessa to ask this
Question. Thanks so much. Thank, thank you
so much, Anna.
Um, you use the term harm reduction approach,
which is a common term used for, um,
harmful addictive substances.
Um, do you believe that you were any, at any time addicted
to, to any of these platforms?
I don't believe that I had a addiction in the same kind
of psychological terms or, um, psychiatric terms.
Um, I do think it was filling a need
and that if I could get my needs met in an alternative
healthy way, then I wouldn't have
had the same reliance on it.
Okay. So, um, can I have a sub that, um, so the, um,
the definition of addiction is that, um, you have, uh,
a sort of a compulsion to do something, um, where you no,
no longer have control over taking that action
or doing that, using that thing to the point
where it's causing harm to you or others around you.
Um, just from a story you told,
it would sound like you'd meet that definition.
It wasn't the technology itself,
the harm was coming from people who both using technology
to facilitate, um, harm to others, particularly like sexual,
um, violence manipulation.
Well, yeah, that's kind of the point. Thank you,
Uh, Francisco
Yoda, and thank you so much for sharing your story
and the advocacy you're doing here.
Um, I just wanted to check, um,
whether you would feel that if there was like, uh,
for example, a ban on the social media companies doing, uh,
displaying certain types of content to, um, people
who were weren't of a certain age,
whether you would consider that stigmatizing in the same way
that a social media ban for, um, people
who are underage would be,
or is that different in your view?
Um, I don't know about the stigmatizing side of it,
but I do think it would be very ineffective already.
TikTok and things like that have made, um, strides in trying
to prevent people from talking about suicide online.
But kids just find new ways to talk about it.
So they spell it S-E-W-E-R side,
and they can still get around the ban and the block.
So you can make whatever filter you want,
but kids are gonna find a way around it.
Um, they'll just use new terminology. Mm-hmm.
Thanks Francisco. Um, thanks.
And after the time you've given us this afternoon,
we appreciate, um, you sharing your perspective
and, and your experience.
Thank you. I'm now gonna invite Tracy Smith,
who's also on Zoom to join us.
Um, Tracy, we have got you for five minutes this afternoon,
including any time for, um, questions.
Can you hear me? Um, yes.
Just need to turn your camera on as well, if you can please.
Um, if it's okay, just for the privacy of my children,
if I don't turn my video on, that's
Fine. Yeah. Yep. Is
that okay? That's fine. Thanks.
So, I'm the mother of two children
who were exploited online groomed
and, uh, through my submission.
And I'd just like to take this opportunity to thank you
for inviting me into this and for opening up this inquiry.
Um, as noted,
and as I've been listening to other speakers too,
there is a, a common theme and,
and, uh, my submission was
around some changes potentially within the justice system.
Um, the platforms themselves, education and predators.
So that's in the way of, you know, that these images
and things that are online wouldn't be
there without these predators.
Uh, so what can we do to work
on treatment for them?
Uh, also for the, the children
who are exposed to these predators, um,
having counselors available.
I know that, uh, I heard earlier that there was a Kate
that didn't have a great experience with a counselor and,
and has just mentioned a psychologist who was not,
um, up to date with, with the terminology and,
and exposure to this kind of harm.
Um, and that's unfortunate to hear these, these stories.
Um, with better education, uh,
this could be a potential part of the solution.
I'm not saying it's the only solution,
but a part of, um, the platforms uploading photos,
naked images, especially there, if we can create tools that
remove clothing from children, et cetera,
why can we not block the upload of these kind of images,
uh, education for parents?
I can tell you from experience that, uh,
yes, uh, they do need to take some responsibility in regards
to educating themselves and their children.
Not all harm is done within the home.
Um, and it is outside of that.
There are many broken homes, broken families, um,
multiple, uh, relationships that it might be
that there are four homes if a parent,
both parents have separated and have other partners.
So, trying to manage all of that, uh,
just making sure that everybody a across that is educated.
So it becomes a holistic approach, not just a parental,
uh, educational experience
and, uh, the justice system.
So that, again, is working with, uh,
both victims and the predators,
and ensuring that we, we have, uh,
some improved, uh, justice around the outcomes
of this type of harm.
Thank you.
Thank you, Tracy. Uh, grant McCullum.
Yeah. Uh, thank you, Tracy.
Uh, just, um, do you think if we could create a, uh,
a safe environment for, for people on young,
younger people on 16, to have an online interaction, like,
you know, to prevent where a place where, um, predators
and so forth couldn't access, would you think that would be,
um, a, a, a useful thing?
Uh, I don't know if there is such a, a thing.
The, these predators are so strategic.
I don't know how the controls
would work in that environment.
Um, we also need to empower our children what
to look for any signs of, uh, harm
that may be occurring.
The, because they're so subtle, these, these changes
in communication.
Uh, children need to be more aware of
that type of communication,
how quickly it can change. Here we go.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Tracy.
We appreciate the time you've, uh, had
with us this afternoon, um,
and for sharing your experience and your recommendations.
Thank you so much. We're now gonna move, uh,
to the office of the privacy commissioner.
Michael's here with us, um, in the room.
Michael, I know that you, um, know the drill.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I welcome, uh, this broad ranging inquiry
into the harm New Zealanders encounter online.
Uh, in fact, we've, uh,
recently completed our 2025 privacy survey.
And one of the findings from that was that around two thirds
of respondents were concerned about young
people and social media.
Of course, as you've heard already,
the online world presents both opportunities, uh,
and risks for young people.
And this, of course, from my perspective,
includes risks to privacy.
Uh, overall, we agree that regulatory work is needed, uh,
with a measured and evidence-based approach, for example.
Uh, and in particular in relation to age assurance.
Uh, my role as privacy commissioner includes monitoring
policy and technology developments
that have significant impacts on New Zealander's privacy,
uh, whether that be what happens online,
ai, all those sorts of areas.
Uh, you've heard a range of concerns, obviously already
about the harms young people face online.
Uh, you've heard mixed views on policy responses.
Uh, and I just want to, I guess, make one main point,
which is that any view of the, of the policy problems, uh,
and potential responses here must also carefully
consider privacy.
Uh, privacy is a critical aspect
of the risks young people face online, uh, already
how their data is collected, uh, who it's shared with,
and what it can be used for.
Uh, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
through the Privacy Act already, uh,
has a regulatory role in relation, uh, to, uh,
the online world, uh, for everybody who takes part in that.
And, for example, we see things like, uh, targeted harms,
uh, like bullying, grooming, and impersonation.
And they all start, of course, with personal information
as do, uh, scatter gun harms, such
as automated cyber attacks and unwanted marketing.
So, privacy, uh, is critical
to understanding the policy options, whether those options,
uh, are safe, are effective,
and reliable enough to earn New Zealanders, uh, buy-in.
I know of course, that there is interest in mandating, uh,
a minimum age for some online services
and variations of this policy, uh,
how being tried in the eu, the uk, and Australia,
and there is of course, the private members bill
with the same, any age restriction, uh,
on online services would of course require steps for users,
uh, to prove their age.
And the collection and use of personal information, uh, does
of course raise significant privacy issues.
Uh, as you've heard, age assurance is not just one thing
or indeed one technology,
but can be approached in different ways
that involve different uses
and types of personal information.
There is of course, age verification,
which relies on information from a trusted document, uh,
like a passport.
While modern digital ID systems aim to minimize
what is shared, it's critical to work through, uh,
the privacy and security issues.
And I'm very happy to talk about, uh, age verification.
Further. Age estimation relies on technologies
that estimate age.
And while that can be convenient for people, uh, well
outside the age restriction age, people like myself, uh,
the error rates for teenagers
and people who look different from those in the training
data can be high.
And that does create a risk of unfairness and exclusion.
And of course, the third category, age inference
relies on mining data about people, uh,
like their browsing patterns to try and infer their age.
Uh, we believe this approach could encourage further data
mining and profiling, which is of course, itself, uh, bad
for privacy, uh,
and indeed creates the risk of further data breaches
Overall, my view is that those privacy issues need to be,
uh, fully understood and worked through in a transparent
and consultative way before any such proposal is advanced.
Further, uh, all New Zealanders
and particularly young New Zealanders deserve
to fully understand, uh, the detailed policy case
before being asked to prove their age online.
I don't want to stray too far from, uh,
my regulatory swim lane, uh,
but for reasons that are pretty obvious, regulation
of the content of the online world is of course a hot topic.
Uh, and I acknowledge its Mental Health Awareness Week.
As I comment on this.
I presume, for example, uh, that no one wants social media
to become a place, uh, dominated by violence, uh, by hate,
uh, by despair.
Uh, but we cannot rely on hoping that that won't happen.
Hope is simply not a viable option.
Responsible self-policing in a manner consisted
with accepted norms, combined with smart regulation
is a more viable option.
Young people need to be protected online,
and regulation, along
with education plays a very important role
in keeping them safe.
However, regulation needs to be appropriately targeted,
effective, and indeed proportionate in relation
to the harms it seeks to address.
For example, I have, uh,
consistently argued since I became a privacy commissioner,
that our privacy regulatory framework should be modernized
to include the right to be forgotten, establishing a right,
uh, for people to have their information deleted, uh,
for example, to allow people a real choice to opt out
of marketing and data mining.
In conclusion, Mr. Chair,
New Zealand is a small open country
and open market, uh, with limited hard power.
We cannot necessarily lead,
but we have the luxury of seeing how policy approaches,
particularly around age assurance, play out overseas.
And indeed, it seems every week brings another piece
of policy research
or official government, uh, guidance in this area.
We can wait and see
what works overseas while doing our own thinking about
what institutions
and rules make particular sense in our context.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
You, Vanessa Wiener.
Uh, thank you very much for that.
Um, it's useful to hear your perspective.
Um, so we've heard from some age assurance providers
who have a third party, um, way of, uh,
providing verif, uh, you know, that to say
that this person is above this certain age that, um, is,
um, consented to be able to be used, doesn't,
it provides a token to the other side
so they don't have the data stored at a, at another place,
um, like the social media,
and it's also double-blinded, so they don't get, uh, any,
um, insight into what it is that the person who's asked
for the verification, um, is actually accessing.
Would that meet the requirements of, um,
the privacy settings in New Zealand?
Uh, so I, I, I,
I think what we're seeing here through you, Mr.
Chair, is, um, a bit of a discussion around if you're going
to go down the age assurance path, how
and what might happen.
And without going down the technology rabbit hole, uh,
what we need to think about a few steps
beyond these proposals is what will the response be?
Uh, there are obviously, and,
and young people, uh,
are particularly technologically clever.
There are approaches to try and get around age verification.
So, uh, what we are proposing is
that further work be done around those options.
Uh, some of them are better options than others, uh, to see
how strong, uh, they would be.
Uh, for example, in New Zealand,
we have our Digital Identity Services trust framework.
Mm-hmm. Um, there are, as you've just talked about, um,
options around what, what are known as zero knowledge proof,
where you don't actually have to provide any
of your personal information to the social media company.
Uh, you can just prove that you meet the requirements
of access without, for example,
providing your date of birth.
Uh, those options I think were worth considering.
Uh, but what I think we need
to see now is a further analysis of the results
of the studies that have been done.
Uh, for example, my colleague in Canada,
the privacy commissioner in Canada, has just, uh,
conducted a study into age assurance mechanisms.
It's those sorts of studies that I think, um, uh, officials
and others need to now analyze to see
how strong the protections are, uh, in there
because, uh, once in this world, you give up, uh, parts
of your privacy is there forever.
And the more and more, uh, that privacy has given up
to deliver on age assurance,
and let's face, it's not just young people, it's everybody
who has to prove their age,
which you would've heard many times.
Uh, you have created a honey pot of information
for very sophisticated cybercriminal criminals as well.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, so my question,
because, uh, you mentioned that you will be willing
to talk more about age verification, so maybe some of
that you've already covered,
but still I'll ask this question about the Australian age
assurance, uh, technology trial.
Um, obviously when we are looking at somebody
who is five versus 50 years,
it's easy to reject the difference.
Mm-hmm. The problem is we, it's for example, 15 versus 16
or 16 versus 17.
Right. And that's where the focus needs to be
for us when we are looking at it.
So very keen to explore your views
and insight, uh, about that,
because that means those people are required
to provide secondary level of information
to prove their age.
Hmm. And, and that is why, uh,
if I think about those three examples through Mr.
Chair that I talked about, uh, age verification,
age estimation, and aid in age inference, I think, uh,
age verification that's done in a way
that results in the least amount
of personal information passing across
is probably the strongest.
I think the use, for example, of biometric technology
for age estimation is not necessarily
gonna be a hundred percent right.
I think age inference from people's browsing happens is not
necessarily gonna be correct either.
I think it comes down to the age verification option
as the strongest, as just a question about whether, uh,
it would meet what New Zealanders would consider a
proportionate response to the, the public policy problem,
uh, that's being considered here.
Yeah. Because there will be always
mechanisms to bypass that.
Thank you. Uh,
Grant McCullum. Yeah.
The, um, obviously people here concerned about parents
being concerned about the, uh, online harm of young people
and, and the privacy of young people.
Do you have a comment to make on parents
who then freely put up pictures of their family
online doing whatever?
Does that not seem to, how, where do you sit on
that? Where does the Yeah,
Your thoughts? So, I
perhaps I can just reflect back, uh, to the committee
that, uh, if I look at, uh, the major issues
or concerns raised, uh, through our website, it's about, uh,
people using technology in a way
that they think infringes on their rights.
It's neighbors with cameras, uh,
it's people taking
photographs of them, those sorts of things.
New Zealanders are concerned about their privacy
and are particularly concerned about the agency, uh,
to have the right to make decisions about what happens
with their images and their personal data.
And so, uh, reflecting on that, uh,
one day children are adults.
Uh, the internet doesn't forget
unless you bring in a regulatory rule around the right
to be forgotten, uh, which I talked about earlier.
And, um, I, um, have in the past
and continue to counsel against, uh,
share anything going too far, frankly, that sharing
of children's, uh, images and information, uh,
because one day, uh, that information,
and if you think about a world with powerful
AI engines driving the ability to search
and match that information together, uh, one day
that information will be discovered by someone wanting
to find out more about that particular individual. Thank
You, Ji,
very quickly just about the nature of complaints.
Uh, curious to know if you receive any complaints about any
images used for deep fake for, sorry, deep fake, deep fake,
any images used for deep fake.
I can't recall any. I'm very happy to have a look, uh,
for the committee and see if there has been, uh,
but, but not yet. No.
We might just record that as a, um, as a post request.
Sure. Uh, I'm just gonna use Cheers, prerogative
to ask your final question, Michael.
Um, which I, I, I becoming more interested
through this inquiry process around the fact
that in the real world, we know we are dealing with a human,
um, in our interactions as we are now,
do you think there's a point where it would be reasonable
for New Zealanders to expect that they were able
to know if they were dealing with a real person online, uh,
as a way of, I suppose, weeding out the number of
AI generated chat bot people who are using other personas,
et cetera, that they're engaging with? Mm-hmm.
And, and I think, uh, Mr.
Chief, that is why, uh, I, I understand the Department
of Internal Affairs has been focused on this issue
of digital identity as a way that can be privacy protective,
but also provide the assurance that whether individuals
or indeed businesses need, that they're dealing, uh,
with a real person that you can prove who you are,
for example, in dealings without passing over, uh,
lots and lots of information.
Um, if you were running a business, uh, for example,
a liquor store and wanted to know whether I was 18,
I would simply show you my driver's license
and then I would take it back
and you would not retain any data.
It's the digital world where data's retained,
that we need the ability to prove identification, uh,
if necessary in a way
that is least privacy intrusive as possible.
Thank you. Appreciate the time you've taken to, uh,
join us Afternoon and fi here in person.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Members, we're now moving to the online safety exchange
and we've got Martin here with us, um, as well in the room.
Mar, thanks for spending some time here this afternoon.
Um, and we've got 10 minutes with you,
including some time for questions.
Yes, my pleasure. Um, for Dunno, me, I'm Martin Fer.
I used to be the chief executive of NSO for 15 years.
Um, we set up the Humble Digital Communications approved
agency, uh, was at the helm through the COVID lockdowns
and the rush to technology, and also
during the Christchurch terror attacks.
So, uh, plenty of experience from the, from the front lines.
Uh, I now do online safety consulting,
which means I provide people with advice
that they don't follow, uh,
and have established another NGO
that works in online safety,
although mostly internationally.
Um, I just quickly give you a summary of the submissions.
I know that officially you've all read them.
Um, but just just to refresh, there are quite a few, uh,
there is debate about the harm
and, uh, impact of various activities online,
but there is consensus pretty much that there is, uh,
problems for young people online that need to be addressed
and that, uh, there is a role for government
to play in addressing them.
There is a rise recently in the popularity
of the raise the age movement.
So, um, a belief that young people can't handle the risks,
so therefore we will raise the age
and they will, will avoid the risks.
The alternative theory to
that is something called guided digital autonomy.
Uh, and guided digital autonomy is much more supported
by the science and research into online safety.
So we've got, uh, one side backed by science and research
and one side that is a lot more popular,
uh, with raise the age.
Uh, and the question for you
or the question for the committee is not should you do
something, but what should you do?
And surprisingly, listening to people's, uh,
submissions this afternoon
and also reading through them, there is a kind
of a consensus emerging,
or it seems to be in that we need an, a new agency
that we actually need something like the eSafety
Commissioner of Australia.
Um, I think one
of the mistakes we've made is we've really focused on
eSafety regulatory powers,
but actually it's regulatory powers have come quite lately.
eSafety has been around for quite a long time.
When it was initially set up, it was focused on establishing
standards, training, coordinating the space, uh, making sure
that the people who were getting money to deliver services
and online safety were meeting some sort
of standard and were doing a good job.
And then over time, as it grew, got regulatory powers
that established codes
and has become the powerful
entity that we know it to be today.
But my advice would be establish the first part of it
as quickly as possible.
Put someone in a position to coordinate, make
that person find out more about what New Zealand needs.
Exactly. Use it to coordinate the ecosystem,
see what happens, and then think about what regulation
you should, uh, back once that had been in place
for a while and advised you.
Okay. Uh, I could talk for hours on this, obviously,
but, um, let's, let's go
to questions if you like the next arena.
Thank you. Um, so you say, um,
basically set up a commissioner first
or something of those similar role
and then Yeah, see what powers they need, um,
how much teeth they need, what sort of fines
or anything other things might need
to be put in place. Yeah,
Yeah, Exactly. I mean, there's
been a huge number of potential, um, ways
that we could address it.
Um, do you think we should, if we were to do something like
that, uh, would there be a a start with an initial framework
or just let them go blank slate?
Uh, well, I, I would imagine you'd wanna start
with some sort of initial framework.
Uh, and we do know that, um,
over the years there has been a lot of work done into
what a coordinating agency
or central agency might look like.
In fact, I know that there are some experts in this room,
uh, not sitting at this table who had a big part in that.
So, uh, I, I, you know, I know that there is a lot of
that background work has been done.
I think where it does fall apart is when we look at the
regulation, people then focus very much
on the regulatory side.
It's gonna be an issue for freedom of speech,
it's gonna restrict people's access, et cetera.
So by not making
that our primary reason why we're setting it up
and focusing on that first,
I think we can get a lot more in place
and we can make, uh, faster progress to procurement.
Francisco, Thank you Chair.
And, um, thank you so much for your, uh,
really interesting submission
and particularly the, the, the sort
of two frameworks you've outlined.
So do you see it as like, um, either
or, like, so do you think that, um, guided autonomy
necessarily precludes things like educating
or is there a guided autonomy framework that could work
with some level of, um, educating?
Yeah, so guided autonomy, um, is simply the way
that we teach young people how to manage risks.
So we teach, uh, young people how
to cross the road exactly that way.
We take them hand in hand, and then we walk next to them,
and then we let them go, right?
Et cetera. So what we're doing is we're saying
that same technique works online.
The research says that same technique works online.
Kids who have been using technology for longer tend
to handle risks better at the next age.
So we know that, that, that technology works.
We also know that there are risks that young people can't
handle when they face them.
So somehow we've gotta try to filter those out.
The issue is that something like social media is actually a
combination of functions.
So if you look at, uh, Facebook
or TikTok, they've got about 70 kind of functional points
that makes up what we call Facebook or, or, or TikTok.
Not all of those 70 things are dangerous, some of them are.
So what you actually need is you need somebody
to take the time to say, okay, well if you're gonna provide
that service to a 13-year-old, you're gonna provide
that service to a 14-year-old.
These are the parts that you can have
and these are the parts that you can't have.
Hmm. A a a drawing a line at 16
and saying, you can't have the whole thing,
or you can have the whole thing a day later, really, uh,
doesn't, doesn't speak to
how complicated those those products are
or the actual risks that exist within them.
Great. Grant McKellen.
Yeah. Um, given your long experience in the,
in this whole space of the, of the internet
and so forth, how serious do you think the actual
big social media companies take this space?
Are they, do you think there's, are, are they,
are they being dragged you screaming?
Are they, uh, what's your view on on,
is there a lot more they could do if they really wanted to?
I mean, you know a lot more about this
Useful lot of pains to tell you about my experience.
Thanks for, um, well, I mean, yes,
they are sort of pushed along.
I mean, the, the reality is within those big companies,
there are, you know, some of the world leading sort
of thought leaders on safety online,
and they work inside those companies,
but, you know, they are working sometimes against the kind
of, um, momentum of the company
And the commercial Interests.
The commercial interests, exactly.
So, you know, they do have to be pushed into the right
space, but then also
we push some of them into the right space.
So we talk about meta a lot, and I think they're here later,
or they're online later.
Sure. Yeah. Um, they're doing more than most, right?
Mm-hmm. But yet they're still the one
that we talk about regulating more than others.
Uh, an aftermath of the terror attacks.
We got content off those big platforms.
I mean, they made some huge errors, which lead to
that content being there in the first place.
But we got the content off those platforms.
That content still exists on numerous platforms
around the world, because there's plenty of platforms
that don't care about our laws.
So, you know, we can regulate
and we can push the, the big tech companies,
but are we gonna push them harder than Europe?
Is, are we gonna push them harder
than America, than Australia?
No, we're not. So our,
our regulatory efforts are not gonna have the same impact.
Get 'em behind those partner countries
and say, yeah, we, we totally endorse what they're doing.
These are global platforms.
Whatever they enforce in Australia, we're gonna
benefit from here anyway.
So let's spend our time thinking about how it is
that we help New Zealanders make the most out
of those platforms, or what it is that we need
for New Zealand on top of that. Mm-hmm.
Final question, Pam. Yeah.
So with your international kind of, uh,
experience in this field, I'm very keen to understand
because technology doesn't see sea borders,
and we live in such a global world.
So at the moment, you know,
countries are doing their own thing,
and we are sitting here trying
to learn what others have done.
And so is there some insight that you can provide us
where we can kind of, uh, take
that into consideration in our deliberations?
Um, because people move around
and we will have some, uh, if we have some kind of,
you know, things implemented here,
Australia have their own things,
you can have their own things.
So how do you see that we keep
that in mind when we are coming up with something in
This? Yeah. Well, I think first,
the first thing I would say is
that there's a lot of celebrated activity around the world
that's made no difference yet.
So, so we're, um, you know, we are seeing things like, uh,
uh, age raising in, um, Australia.
We are seeing, uh, the law in the uk.
People are telling us how fantastic it is.
It, it has, it hasn't made a difference yet.
We don't actually know if it's gonna reduce the rates of,
of harm that young people are facing,
or which rates of which harm it might impact, right?
So if we had a coordinating body,
if we invested a bit more time
and following along, if we had the resources to go
and join the regulators network
and, you know, be a part of those things, then we'll learn
what is working and we can, you know, be a fast follower
or whatever it's, that's best in,
in our best interest. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Marc.
Appreciate the time you've taken to us, uh, this afternoon.
Thank you. Uh, members, if I could ask you to move over
to the private link.
Um, oh, sorry, that's not on my, yeah,
One more there.
Say the children.
Sorry. That's okay. That's right. No worries at all.
Um, sorry.
Jackie and Kathy,
we've got a version control on the agenda issue here.
Um, please join us at the table.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes with you, um, this afternoon.
Thank you. Uh, call Jackie Koto, Jackie s England
Child Rights Advocacy
and Research Director Save the Children.
I'll pass over to Heather Campbell, our CEO.
Ah, good afternoon. I'm Heather Campbell.
I'm the CE of Save the Children New Zealand.
Um, yeah, thank you.
Save the Children welcomes the opportunity
to share our oral submission, um, into this inquiry.
Um, save the Children is one
of the world's leading child rights organizations.
We were founded more than a hundred years ago to uphold
and advance the rights of children.
And we've been working in New Zealand for over 75 years.
Um, say The children strongly supports the government taking
concrete steps to better understand the harm young people
encounter online,
and the roles key stakeholder groups such as government,
business, and society should play in addressing those harms.
And I'm gonna hand over to Jackie.
She can talk more about some of the research that we've done
and our overall experiences.
Thanks, Heather. It is clear
that serious harm exists in the online world.
This harm may occur through content, including content
that is deemed objectionable
and illegal already in New Zealand,
and may include suicide, child, sexual abuse, material,
violent extremist material,
and graphic violence harm may also occur
through the way children and young people are treated,
including by strangers
or by people known to them, such as bullying, harassment,
grooming, encouraging self-harm, eating disorders,
or violent behaviors, objectifying sexual exploitation,
scamming, or other forms of exploitation or radicalization.
Too much time online is also known to be harmful.
Conversely, the online world also provides a myriad
of positive opportunities, tools, information
and experiences for children
and young people, such as connecting with friends
and whanau, whether quick check-ins
or maintaining relationships over long distances, connecting
with like-minded friends or interest groups, learning
and skill development opportunities,
and the ability to seek information
to support their learning
and development, their interest, their connection
to services for entertainment, or the ability to create
and share content to a wider audience in positive ways
for children and young people in ALT In New Zealand,
the online world is deeply enmeshed in their daily lives.
According to the last census, 93%
of households have access to the internet.
While internet New Zealand reports, 93%
of New Zealanders over 18 years under eighteens are not
reported user internet at home on a daily basis.
Increasingly, everyday activities are moving online, such
as buying the things that we want and need.
Our phones, traditional landlines are
being actively phased out.
Watching TV is also reliant on a digital connection,
and many services are being directed towards online health,
uh, sorry, online provision.
And this includes health and mental health services.
They're another example
of increasing reliance on the digital world where access
to information and support is actively promoting, including
to our young people, such as messaging, support apps,
or text response services.
The lowdown or RTD are just to examples.
Education is deeply enmeshed in the digital world.
According to New Zealand based research, New Zealand leads
and classroom device and internet usage globally
via Save the Children New Zealand Survey,
children report School as the second most common place
after their home, that they access the internet.
According to international research,
why Save the Children International children's engagement in
the digital world has become so prevalent.
It is estimated that every half second a child goes onto the
in internet for the first time,
children are part of the digital world.
Children are being harmed via the digital world.
And action to prevent
and limit harm led by government is
needed, save the children.
New Zealand is strongly supportive of action to prevent
and limit harm to children and youth via the digital world.
However, we do not support the proposed blanket ban on
social media for children under 16 years of age.
This measure would only protect children aged 14 to 15
years, and is narrowly focused
to social media rather than the broader digital world.
The proposed band does not address harmful content
or harmful behaviors,
and fails to protect children over 16 years of age
who are at si at significant risk of,
and some report the experience of serious harm.
Our submission is informed by the Voices
of Post 1000 children in New Zealand, age six
to 18 years in an online survey conducted earlier this year
in collaboration with NetSafe, based on our findings
and in consideration of additional research,
while also taking into account children's rights under the
UN Convention on the rights of the Child,
save the Children makes the following recommendations
to prevent, limit, prevent and limit children
and young people experiencing online harm.
We make 10 key recommendations.
We encourage government to, one,
consider a child rights approach to children's
and young people's online experience of the online world
and encompassing provision, participation
and protection in alignment with the three key pillars
of the convention on the rights of the child.
To take a life course approach to preventing harm
to children and young people when online.
And that includes the consideration of children's views,
experiences, and advice.
They, they have to share for a safer
and more positive online world.
Develop resource
and implement digital citizenship education
to empower both children
and adults to effectively reduce the risks
and empower children safe and positive experiences online.
Four, we call for tech companies to be,
or tech platforms to be held to account
and require significant reduction of exposure
to extremely harmful, objectionable,
and illegal content online.
Prohibit the use of algorithms
that deliberately serve up inappropriate
and harmful content to children and youth,
and pre prohibit the use of strategies
and settings that encourage children's excessive and
or addictive use of devices or apps.
Seven, we ask for the development
and implementation of greater controls related
to online advertising that limit the amount
of on amounting content of advertising being served up
to children and young people while online work with children
and youth to share their input into the policies
or legislation that may be implemented to prevent
or reduce harm through children
and young people to ensure that, ensure that effective
nine require tech platforms to ensure that reporting privacy
and safety mechanisms can be easily accessed by young people
and are effective in responding to reports
of harmful behavior or content.
And finally, 10, establish
and implement age appropriate content and
or access controls.
This applies to both children
and adults, prohibiting children from accessing
content similar to an R 18 rating,
and preventing adults from accessing platforms intended
for children such
as child-focused live online gaming sites or chats.
That concludes our submission,
and we're happy to take any questions.
Thanks very much. Any questions? Grant McCullum?
Yeah, I'm just finding, I'm, I asked summing similar
for the, of the privacy commissioner, do you have concerns,
you know, parents are the ones
that have re raised this concern about safety of the,
of children online, yet often the same parents will then put
lots of pictures of their own children all over the internet
doing whatever this family stuff.
Do you see any issue with that?
Well, I think it's about that education
for parents and children.
So adults and children and digital citizenship. Mm-hmm.
Quite often we are very quick to say, oh,
children on devices, but we're not looking at ourselves
as adults on device devices.
And we do need to look at that. Mm-hmm.
And one of the issues with a narrow focus on social media is
we fail to see the impact of technology
and devices on our very young children.
Uh, there's research New Zealand research
that shows the highest users
of YouTube in New Zealand are under five.
And that is because lots of the programs
that they're watching are being streamed
through devices such as hip pig, for example.
Um, poor patrol, those really popular shows Yeah.
Are being streamed by these platforms and devices endlessly.
So we need to really have that conversation for adults
and children about, you know, what's, what's safe online,
what's good, what's healthy, what decisions are we making?
And that's the heart of digital citizenship, not how
to turn a phone on, but when and why to use it, when
and why not to use it, and
being informed in those decisions. Thank
You. Agree.
Thanks, pat. Any other question? Oh, Francisco,
Uh, thank Joe. Before I ask
my question, did I hear right that, um, one
of you is from Australia?
Uh, we're from Save the Children, so New Zealand.
Oh, okay. Well, I misheard the introductions then.
I thought one of you was from, um,
save the Children Australia for some reason.
Sorry, we should have been clearer,
but no, say the children New Zealand.
Okay. Any other questions? Very good, thank you.
Thank you so much for taking the time to present
to the committee this afternoon.
Sure. Really appreciate your time. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thanks so much. Thank you.
Um, so committee members, we, we'll be back at four,
4:00 PM um,
and then we have a series of, uh, extended hearings as well.
So if I can just ask, keep your questions, um, concise
as we go through those, I imagine there'll be a lot.
Thank you.
Welcome Dave, uh, to the Select committee this afternoon.
Appreciate your time and, and you being here.
We've got 10 minutes with you, including time,
questions far away.
Uh, well, uh, Koto on behalf of the telco sector, thanks
so much for the opportunity to participate in the inquiry.
I'm the policy director
with the new New Zealand Telecommunications Forum
and joining me as day from Spark as one of our members.
Um, with our time with you today, what we'd like
to talk about is the role that telecommunication plays
as the infrastructure that enables the internet, um,
and offer some thoughts on risk-based regulation.
Our written submission also has information about benefits
of connectivity for young people and the various services
and information that our members provide to help parents
with online harm.
But we won't mention that unless there's,
um, questions in that area.
Uh, first up, we'd like to talk
to you about telecommunications
as the pipes officials have no doubt briefed you on
how the internet works.
And one important distinction to keep in mind is
between the cables
and the wireless signals that enable access
to the internet on the one hand, and then the platforms
and websites that operate on top
of the telecommunications infrastructure.
So our members are essentially the pipes,
while the platforms that enable the creation or hosting
or sharing of online content, they're
what we call the over the top services.
And it is quite an important distinction
because it's the over the top services
that can see the content of internet traffic.
Um, so with telco providers,
what they're doing is forwarding packets of data
but don't see what's in the packets.
Um, because encryption makes it really tricky, um,
or virtually impossible, uh, to see the content
of most internet traffic these days.
And Dave, who's online is gonna tell you
about internet filtering.
'cause presumably that's something
that other submitters have been talking about.
So over to you, Dave.
Yeah, thank you. So you may have heard, uh,
some submitters talk about internet filtering
or website blocking by internet access providers.
So this is where the network operator can block access
to a website based on its address.
So it is done today actually to prevent access
to child sexual abuse material and to block scam websites.
So TCF members, um, apply the,
the DIA's Digital Child Exploitation filtering system,
which includes blocking websites on the internet
Watch foundation list.
And we work with the banks and government
and law enforcement to identify and block scam websites.
And you may remember we blocked websites, uh,
hosting the shooters video immediately
after the Christchurch terrorist attacks.
But the problem with network filtering at its that is
that it's becoming increasingly ineffective.
So firstly, it can be easily circumvented
by motivated users using VPNs.
And these are very easy to access and use even for children.
And more and more websites are encrypted.
And what that means is that we can't see
what content people are accessing and
therefore we don't know which traffic to block.
And network level filtering is also a blunt tool in
that you have to block it the entire website level.
So this means it'd be necessary to block all of all
of YouTube, Instagram or TikTok
because we can't block individual pages or posts of concern.
However, if you were to look at doing network filtering,
there's a few things that we would, uh, need
to consider from a ISPs perspective to be in place, um,
in order for that legislation
to be effective from our point of view.
So the first is we'd need government direction.
So government needs to formally tell us
as network operators what to block.
The second is we'd need a trusted authority.
So a central and auditable authority needs
to make the decisions on what to block
and that's needed for consistency and transparency.
And the third thing we need is a safe harbor.
So the cost of businesses, if you,
if their website goes down, is huge.
So if we accidentally, um, block something
that was legitimate, then potentially we could be in, in,
in the firing line for that.
So we want some legal liability, um, cover for that,
and a safe harbor would provide that.
So a more effective way of filtering is to manage the access
through filtering at the device level.
So parental controls are already built into most mobile
phones and laptops
or third party, uh,
par third party filtering apps can be easily installed.
And this approach allows more granular filtering at the
device level and can operate independently of the network,
keeping the user safe, whether they're connected
to the home broadband, the mobile network,
or a public wifi hotspot.
So while this is good for blocking static content,
like a specific webpage
or even a whole website, even this type
of filtering isn't granular enough to block
or modify what sites like TikTok, Instagram
or YouTube show in their social feeds.
Um, and they also often don't block content delivered
through apps, uh, which can use their own methods
to push content to individuals.
So in summary, filtering is a blunt tool,
especially when done at the network level.
It can only block entire websites
and can easily be avoided by motivated users.
Device level filtering is better as it offers more control,
but it's still got limitations
and challenges, especially around social media content.
And the key thing is that as with social media content,
it's the algorithms
and we can't touch anything that's happened with the,
the algorithms or block dynamic
content that they may deliver.
So really the only effective way of managing that is
by working directly with the social media companies
and the websites and services, uh, tamari
and Tahi, uh, accessing.
I'll hand back to Kim.
Uh, thanks Dave. Um,
and just to round off a few words about risk-based
regulation, um,
no doubt the committee will be thinking about regulatory
possibilities, um, to keep young people safe online.
And as you do that, we recommend you take a
risk-based approach.
Just thinking carefully about who
or what should be in and out of scope.
And telecommunication services such as voice calling and SMS
or MNS messages are generally low risk, uh,
because they don't host or promote user generated content.
They also provide really essential communication channels
between parents and children.
Uh, so we think that any regulatory efforts that
that's the direction the committee's going into should be
focused in the higher risk areas with, um, the platforms,
social media, content sharing apps,
or any other applications that have a significant social,
um, functional functionality,
which you would've seen in gaming recently in paragraph 13
of our submission, we list a set of services
that we think young people really do need access to, um,
the messaging services, email, landlines, voice services,
all the communication tools used in education,
and really importantly, the services for, for health
and mental health, um, as well.
Uh, so that's just a summary of our submission.
We're happy to take questions
Je Yeah.
So, um, I'm very keen to understand like
as a network provider, uh, though it's not, uh,
as you've said in your submission, not you,
but your members provide, um, these services like NetSafe
and a two degrees Spark you have mentioned here.
So do you hold them to account?
Do you have kind of any kind of mechanism
where you get any kind of reporting of
how harmful content is blocked
and how successful they have been? Um,
So our members can't see the content.
Um, they're just providing the, the,
the basis basic infrastructure.
Um, but we, as Dave mentioned, we do do some,
some filtering, um, based on
DIA's recommendations and, and rules.
How much are you asking? Like how much like might Yeah,
so evade the filter,
Like how, how do we know, like it's done in a way where
you are, uh, kind of demonstrating that responsibility
because obviously what is happening is not working,
so there is harm happening out there.
And so just want to understand
what you're doing at the moment.
How do you make sure that it's, uh,
it's actually giving some kind of effect
to what needs to be done? Yeah.
So we are can Answer that.
Yeah, go. Thank you Dave. Yeah, so, um, we all, uh,
well, most of the ISPs work with the DIA for the DIA filter.
Um, and so there's reporting that's done
through the filter itself
and um, I know that the, the, um, um, uh, the people on the,
the DIA, they work with the ISPs to make sure that, um,
that, that, that that's operating correctly.
So I think what we are doing in the ISP world actually is
effective and it is working in terms
of blocking whole websites.
I think what we're saying is that's just part of the story.
Um, our filtering is, again, part of the story,
which can be evaded.
It's actually quite a good sort of first line of defense,
but it, it's quite a blunt instrument.
So really where I think what we're hearing most
of the problems are, uh,
today has really been around the edge.
It's the, it's the, the people
who are using the services over our network.
Yeah. So with the encryption, um, issue,
so is there any work being done in that regard?
Because that's an issue which you'll have to deal with?
Yeah, like that's a, it's a global, um,
technology development, so encryption is a good thing.
So it enables us to have trust
that when we do online banking
or uh, we, we buy, buy anything on online
and we transact with people, that's about making sure
that stays secure.
The flip side to that is it makes it harder to yeah.
Intercept and, and, and block things, uh, along the way.
It's an international issue that governments,
that technology people we're all kind of looking at and,
but really there's the tension
and there always is a tension between technology
and security versus being able to block things.
Um, and that's really again, why, um, things you try
and do in the core of the network are kind of limited
and really where we need to put the focuses on what's
happening around the network.
So it's the, it's the companies that are at the edge
or the, the end actual device, uh, where you can,
you actually can where they before the encryption happens
before it goes across our network.
But yeah, it's, it's a global,
global issue with law enforcement.
Um, so Also, could I just add to that? Yeah.
I think there's also a really important issue
around empowering parents to kind of have the confidence
and the digital skills to use the parental tool,
um, settings.
Um, because you are a lot of really good settings available,
but clients need to know how to use them.
Dave, to go back to a point you made earlier in the
submission, uh, around some of the things that the,
the telecommunication companies would need if you
or we were to expand the breadth of
filtering expectation, like the safe harboring, et cetera,
um, I wasn't a hundred percent clear on whether
or not you were essentially saying even if we gave you
those, um, three things you requested,
whether or not it would be any more effective
and would help as part of that first line of defense,
or if even if we gave you that, it, it wouldn't help.
Yeah. So I think the answer is both.
So even for us to do it
and have, um, feel, feel like we've got the right structure
around it, and by the way, we're having similar
conversations in the world of blocking scam sites, um, is
that gives us the, the agency and the, the ability
and the confidence to block those sites.
However, even if we did block them,
it's fairly trivial to get round.
And by the way, we can only take down the whole of Facebook,
the whole of take TikTok, which clearly isn't
what we're trying to, to do here.
No, I appreciate that. But I, I,
I think this is probably one of those things
where there's multiple, um, a actions that need
to be taken in order to solve.
So that was a good clarification.
That's all we've got time for this afternoon.
Thank you for taking the time to present to the committee.
Um, really appreciate it. Thank you.
We now have Adam Hadley from Tech Against
Tourism, uh, on Zoom.
No, we don't. We've got meta. We're going straight to meta.
Okay, thank you.
Um, so we've got Mia from Meta on Zoom.
Uh, m if you can turn on your camera and your mark.
Uh, mayor, we've got 20 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions.
I appreciate the fact that you're, um, joining us early
and uh, I'll hand over to you to start.
Um, tu thank you so much for, um, inviting matter
to appear before you today,
and, uh, I thought it might be helpful, obviously happy
to answer any questions you have about our submission,
but they've also been, um,
some development since we made our submission earlier this
year that I thought might be of interest, um,
to the committee that I, I thought I could start with, um,
sharing an update about, um, so at the outset I wanted
to emphasize that from Meta's perspective,
we certainly share the commitment
of the New Zealand government
and New Zealand policy makers such as yourselves to ensure
that young people have positive, age appropriate
and safe experiences online.
Um, we certainly recognize our responsibility
to protect the safety of the people who use our services,
especially young people.
Um, and it's essential to our business in, in,
in many aspects because people will only continue
to use our services if they feel welcome and safe.
Uh, in terms
of the more recent development since we filed our
submission, um, firstly,
as we noted in our submission at the start of this year,
we started rolling out teen accounts on Instagram,
including in New Zealand.
Um, and since we made our submission, we've now completed
that global rollout.
And so globally now we've placed hundreds of millions
of teens into teen accounts.
Um, now teen accounts offer young people enhanced
protections like automatically being placed into private
accounts and some of the strictest settings
of our content controls.
Um, our safety
and privacy settings have been developed over many years,
um, and through many, uh, consultations.
So since 2018, we've consulted
with more than 600 stakeholders, um, 300 young people
and 270 parents from over, uh, 35 countries to help, uh,
inform, uh, the types of, uh, protections
and tools that would be most useful to them, uh, without,
um, introduction of teen accounts on Instagram.
And now it's expansion to both Facebook and Messenger.
This really reflects our belief
that young people deserve online spaces
that are age appropriate, that are protective,
and that are guided by the adults in their lives.
And, uh, we're very encouraged that nine out
of every 10 active teen accounts have remained in the
stricter content settings.
Um, another important development since we filed our
submission at the end of July, uh, uh,
the global regulatory developments that are seeking
to promote, um, a whole
of ecosystem approach to age assurance.
So whilst a lot of the debate, um,
has focused solely on social media, uh, we note
that this committee is considering all online activity
and experiences of, uh, young New Zealanders.
And if we think about the way in which young people
move seamlessly between different apps, um,
that's why we believe that it's important
that age assurance is an industry-wide commitment, uh,
for the online ecosystem.
Uh, one challenge
with providing an age appropriate experience online is
that some degree of personal information is required.
So that's either age related data, it's ID verification,
it's age estimation, using biometric data,
or its behavioral data using age inference models.
And if each app individually has to verify age,
then there are increased privacy and security risks
and an increased burden on young people
and their families, um, to confirm their age with each app,
um, a similar approach,
but one that is a data minimization approach is app store
or operating system level age assurance.
So under this model app stores like the Apple App Store
or the Google Play Store would confirm age
and then share age band signals with each app.
And then each app tailors their age appropriate experience
to these signals and feeds back any relevant information.
So we're heartened that a number
of regulators in other countries are sharing this vision.
So in the US um, there are 20 states
that have introduced app store legislation, uh,
and we've seen three states, um, Louisiana, Texas,
and Utah Pass app store accountability language.
And in August, Brazil passed the Brazil Youth Safety bill.
Um, so our view is that rather than locking teens out
of digital platforms entirely,
which can push them towards less regulated spaces, um,
there's a, a, an opportunity for New Zealand
to create a more balanced, effective,
and enforceable solutions similar to the approach
that other jurisdictions have undertaken.
But, um, hopefully those opening remarks are helpful in
providing an update, uh, on um, what's been happening, uh,
on these issues since our submission.
And I look forward to your questions.
Thanks Mia. Uh, I'm just gonna ask the first question.
In terms of the app store verification, doesn't
that just move the liability from the social media platform
to the, the app store?
I, I understand the concern around that and,
and the answer is no.
So the idea is a whole of ecosystem approach
where each individual app is also undertaking the investment
in age assurance similar to what Meta does.
Now, the critical thing with the app store model is
where is the data collected to, to verify
that age at the outset?
So is that each individual app trying to do that,
or does it get once at the app store level at sort of
that moment when the phone or the computer is being set up?
Uh, and then it's shared in a privacy protective way for all
of the apps within the ecosystem
to then be providing an age assurance, um, system based on
that original signal that's been collected in a
data minimization way.
And then, so a supplementary to that, uh,
we heard earlier today that after sort of six
or eight weeks, your algorithm essentially can really
understand someone's birth date down to days
or, or, or, or weeks.
If you were then getting a different signal from the actual
usage of that, uh, individual, let's say a 15-year-old to
what the app store had told you, do you then feed back
and say, Hey, you've got it wrong?
Yeah, that's certainly the model that we'd be advocating
for, that there's an ongoing communication between all, um,
players within the ecosystem.
That's why we're calling it a whole of ecosystem approach
to make sure that there's, uh, constant, um, uh, engagement
around this issue of age
because, uh, you know, from our perspective,
it's very important that people have age
appropriate experiences online.
But it is, um, it is challenging for every individual app
or device to be collecting age in a different way.
Great. Uh, honorable Phil Tifford.
Alright, thanks for the Question
and a sub and then we'll go around.
Sure. Thanks for the submission.
Um, do the teen accounts have a different algorithm?
Uh, so I mean, there's different algorithms
that are running across the site, uh, many different times.
But if you are referring to the distribution
of like the content ranking algorithm,
then the teen accounts have the strictest content controls
to reduce exposure, um, to, uh, more sensitive types
of content that might otherwise be permitted under
our content policies.
Um, so obviously things like, um, suicide
and self-harm are, uh, things that, uh,
we don't want our adolescent kids to be subjected to online,
but often those things are the end product of being
immersed in an unremitting diet of kind
of status competition
and body image competition that kids are exposed to, um,
on, on sites like yours.
Um, do you, do you have any controls underway in terms
of the way your algorithms manage, um, users
exposure to those things?
Yeah, well if I'm maybe start by just sort
of differentiating out between content ranking algorithms
and recommendation algorithms.
And so the content ranking algorithms are designed to,
you know, within the, the body of content
that you could potentially be seen ensure that the content
that we predict is going to be most relevant, useful,
and interesting to someone is, is at, is higher to the top
of their feed so that, you know, they're, they're,
they're getting to the relevant content, um, faster, uh,
than having to scroll all the way through.
And then there's recommendation, um, uh, algorithms
that are trying to connect people with content
that they might be interested but they're not
otherwise connected with.
And we have, um, both, uh, content policies that try
to remove, uh, and, and proactively detect and, uh,
and prevent people from seeing harmful content
before it's reported to us.
We have content distribution guidelines about reducing the
distribution of content, um, that might be, um, sensitive.
And then we have recommendation, um, guidelines
that prevent the sharing
or the recommendation of content
that might also be sensitive.
So we have a number of different ways in which we have, uh,
policies and technology designed
to reduce people's exposure, uh, to that type
of harmful content.
Can I have one more chair? Quick one.
Okay. So, but do you consider, um, constant body exposure
to body image competition and status competition?
That is, that is a feature of your platform.
Do you think that that is harmful content?
Does that, does that fall within your definition
of harmful content when,
when we're talking about adolescence?
Yeah, so we have a, I mean we certainly have policies
that are designed to, um, remove
and restrict, um, self-harm type of content including, um,
harmful body image content.
And we work really closely with experts, uh,
in mental health and in body image disorders to try
to make sure that our policies are updated, um,
as there are new and different trends that are occurring.
So certainly from our perspective, we have policies, uh,
we implement those policies
and then we work with experts to try to make sure
that they're up to date and current to reduce people, uh,
being exposed to that type of content.
And then we also, I mean, uh, one of the, um, things I think
that can happen is obviously we're designing our platforms,
um, for a large number of people to be using them.
Um, but it's not always possible to know
what might be going on in a particular person's life.
So there are additional controls.
Um, for example, if you are, you know,
if there's a particular type of content that you don't want
to see, um, you can, uh, go into the,
why am I seeing this tool?
It's available on every post or every ad.
Um, and then we say, these are the types of interests
that we think you have, and if you don't want those,
then you can, um, change those or,
or block particular things.
So that, again, if there's something
that we don't know about that you need for your protection,
then um, people can make a setting, um, that gives them the,
the type of content
and services that are most helpful to them.
Thank you. Thank you.
So my question is about parental control.
Uh, very keen to understand if somebody tries
to create another account, uh, to bypass parented control.
Do you have any safeguards there?
And the second is, what is the kind of proportion, uh,
of accounts that have parental control compared to
what should be what it should be?
So basically two questions in there. Yeah,
Sure. Certainly.
So I think, um, uh, certainly the way
that we have designed the teen accounts experience is
designed to increase, um, the sort of the engagement
and conversation between young people, uh,
and their parents around their online activity.
Um, and so, um, there's sort of two levels of settings.
So obviously teen accounts is, uh, between 13
and 18 on our services.
And then, um, it, at the older age bracket, um,
teens can only get into less restrictive settings, um,
with the, um, you know, with the permission of the parent.
So we are trying to sort of create an ecosystem environment
that sort of, um, encourages that dialogue.
And then there are certain transparency tools
that parents can have in relation to teen accounts that,
for example, let them see, you know, the types
of content that the people, sorry,
Sorry, I'm gonna interrupt 'cause we are short of time.
So what I want to understand is if somebody tries
to create a secondary account yes.
They know that one account,
the primary account is controlled by parents.
Yes. And this teacher who is between 13 to 18 decides
to create another account to bypass that control.
Yes. Do you have safeguards there so
that this team cannot create a secondary account?
That is the first question.
And second is the proportion of accounts
that have parental control, uh, just looking to see if
what kind of awareness is needed?
Yeah, so on the second one, I don't have that information
to hand and I'm happy to see what I can share with you, um,
as part of, um, responding
as a follow up to the committee's work.
And on the first one, I mean, a lot
of the times a young person will have multiple accounts, um,
but they'll be linked through the same email address.
And so then the same kind of parental controls,
um, will kick in.
And then I think in relation,
if they had like a completely separate one, you know,
I'd have to sort of go and sort
of workshop this with their product teams.
But there are different triggers that an account can, um,
trip over on the site that may require that account
to be age checked.
And, um, so then it gets put through similar, um,
provisions in relation to, um,
being placed into teen accounts.
And then we go back through that same flow
of needing to engage with parents. So are
We not making an assumption
that it'll be the same email ID that that person will use
because that person could use different email
Id possible? Sure.
I mean, look, if, if a young person is definitely trying
to evade particular systems, they, they will try to do that.
But we, from our perspective, we have a range
of different sort of, um, we call it a waterfall approach
to try to make sure that we are understanding, um, you know,
when an account might be, um, changing its age or,
or misrepresenting its age so
that we can give them the right kind
of experience on the platform. Okay,
Vanessa? Okay. Uh,
thank you very much.
Um, one of the harms that have been, um,
highlighted potentially is, um, just the, uh, part, the,
um, addictive nature of, um, some of the,
essentially some of the features, for example,
infinite scrolling that can go on.
It's a, um, it's basically by hacking the human, um,
dopamine, um, axis
and is, um, is related to, uh,
addictive behavior that would meet the clinical threshold.
Um, how would, um, limits on
infinite scrolling and also, um, the, um, ability
to have a monitoring
or a, um, re um, research, um,
ability to see elder algorithmic transparency.
Um, how would that actually work
or could that actually work?
Yeah, maybe if I, um, sort of, uh, give you
Those controls to Answer your question.
So the first part is, look, I think, um, the suggestion
that, uh, that our services are designed
to be intentionally addictive really misrepresents our in
intentions and the work that we do do.
Um, you know, we want people to have a, like a positive
and intentional experience using our services.
And certainly within teen accounts, there's a number
of time management controls, including the ability
for the parents to set, uh, daily time limits.
So, um, we do try to provide tools, um, I mean, obviously,
you know, algorithmic, uh, content ranking is designed
to put the most relevant content up the top so
that you see the most interesting content first.
Uh, and, and then can go and do other things.
And then there's additional time
management tools that we invest.
But then on the second part, in terms
of algorithmic transparency, I mentioned as part
of my answer to the other question that we do have,
there's on platform tools called Why am I seeing this
and Why am I seeing this ad that allow you
to see the background
and context about why you're seeing that particular ad
and go in and change your settings if,
if it's not relevant to you or not.
Interesting. And then we also have systems cards, um,
that we publish in our transparency center that provide, um,
insights into the different signals, um,
that we take into account when, uh,
running the various different, uh, recommendation
and ranking algorithms across the different
surfaces on our platform.
So thank you. But I was meaning the ability
for a monitoring agency, um,
or a research, um, institute to be able
to see those settings rather than the individuals
Sure. That, so the systems
cards,
anyone can go into the systems
cards, they're publicly available.
So if a researcher
or monitoring agency want to look at those, um, they can go
and see the different signals that we take into account.
Um, I'm not quite sure technically, um, you know,
how else you are thinking about it.
Great. And I'm happy to send as a follow up a link
to the systems cards, um, that have been
provided in case that's helpful to your work.
Thank you Francisco.
Uh, thank you chair, and thank you so much for, um,
you know, fronting, uh, in front of the committee.
Mia. Um, one of the things it's really encouraging to see
that, um, you know, meta is taking all these, uh,
positive steps, you know, rolling out the 10 accounts, uh,
doing all this, um, good self-regulation,
but I guess I'm just concerned that like when the attention
and spotlight ends up fading,
that you guys will end up rolling a lot of it back.
And I'll give you an example of that is the, um, there used
to be like a fact checking program that meta instituted,
you know, partly as a result of the pressure
that you guys faced, um, because of the Myanmar genocide.
Uh, but you know, earlier this year
you've unrolled the program.
So how can, I guess, regulators have some sort of assurance
that when the spotlight fades
and when we stop paying attention to you guys,
that you guys won't end up unrolling a
lot of these features back.
Well, thank you for that question.
And I might respond by sort of, um,
breaking it into two parts
and firstly just sharing an update
about the fact checking program.
So the fact checking program is still in
place in New Zealand.
The announcement that I think you're referring
to is at the start of the year where we announced
that we were switching our fact-checking program from being,
um, reliant on third party fact checkers
to the community notes, um, method of fact-checking.
And so that has been what's been rolled out in the US
and we're working through, uh, you know, improvements and,
and, um, a greater sort of rollout of that program.
So there's certainly been a switch in the US in relation to
how fact checking is undertaken.
Um, but certainly in New Zealand, uh,
it's still the same model
that we announced several years ago
and have been, um, actively,
uh, invested in, in New Zealand.
Um, but having said that, I think, um, you know, sort
of more broadly in terms of, uh, the variety of different,
uh, measures that have been in place, uh, on our services.
I mean, we've had our content policies and,
and enforce those, um, you know, for well over a decade.
We've been steadily increasing our, uh,
investment in proactive detection technology.
Uh, we've been publishing transparency reports now for,
you know, um, well over five years and,
and increasing the level of transparency that's available.
And particularly in New Zealand.
Several years ago we did, uh, you know, we were part
of the industry coalition, um, uh, that started publishing,
um, uh, transparency reports against the code of practice
of, um, for online safety and harm.
So, uh, we have been continually trying to invest in these
and have been also very grateful to work with a large number
of different, uh, stakeholders in New Zealand, uh,
responding to their questions
and making sure that we're understanding
and responsive to, um, local concerns in New Zealand.
Thanks, grant McCullum. Yeah, thank mayor.
I really appreciate, it's been very informative.
Um, I suppose, look, when we we dial this right back, we,
we are doing this inquiry
because there's a genuine concern,
particularly from parents about
what their children are being exposed to and,
and the influence is having on, on them and, and, and, and,
and what broader sense.
So yet, yet, so parents are telling us this,
yet you are telling us that you are, you are fixing it
and all these things are going on,
yet these problems are still very much existing.
Uh, I'm be keen you hear your response to that.
And, and then secondly, I just wanna understand
that the teen accounts, so if you, uh, are they a voluntary
or opt-in thing, or are they intended to be compulsory
for anyone who's under a certain age?
Yeah, I might, I might take the second question first.
Yeah. Um, so in relation to teen accounts, uh,
that is something that we've been gradually rolling out.
Uh, and it's not designed to be voluntary.
It's designed to be, um, the, the experience for anyone
who is between the ages of 13 and 18 on our services.
So, um, and then again, to sort of build on the, the comment
that I made to, um, to your colleague, uh, sitting next
to you, the, you know, the idea as well is that as the teen,
you know, sort of ages up, that there is increased incentive
for conversation between the parent and the young person.
And I think that sort of goes to trying
to answer your first question is that I, I think, uh,
you know, online safety really from our experience is really
a multi-stakeholder, uh, commitment.
You know, industry players such as ourselves need
to be stepping up and doing what we can to, you know,
invest in the right policies, the enforcement
of those policies and the right tools
and settings, uh, to keep people safe.
Uh, and then we also need, you know, to work
with governments, uh, around rule setting
and understanding community concerns.
And then we also need to work with local, um,
community partners and, uh, parental and safety groups.
And I think trying to create that dialogue, um, you know,
that sort of last part of the dialogue around education
and literacy and ongoing engagement so
that parents feel empowered about how
to have these conversations
and address, um, some of these challenging issues.
I think that's where there's just a constant need
to keep engaging and doing more.
And that's certainly how we've designed teen accounts is to
incentivize that engagement by offering the teen
that's older, the ability to get slightly fewer,
like less restrict settings,
but only if they've had
that conversation with their parents.
Mia, I appreciate we started early.
Happy to answer a couple more questions.
Yeah, sure. Great. Palm Palmer,
Uh, thank you so much. I'm
really keen to understand the experience in Australia
leading up to the ban.
And, uh, just want to understand is it going to be workable
and what do you think will be the error margin?
Uh, so I, it might be helpful if I start by just sort
of giving you an overview
of the different processes that have been happening in Australia.
'cause not all of them have been, um, trans,
like held in public.
So there's about four different processes
that are underway in Australia at the moment, uh,
in the lead up to the enforcement
date on the 10th of December.
Uh, and, uh, so the first of those was a, a scope
of services consultation.
So that's which services are within the scope of the ban.
Uh, and then the second, um, is, uh,
the age assurance technology trial, uh, report,
which I think you had the project director on, um,
earlier today.
Uh, then there's been, um, there's work underway
with the Privacy Commissioner on privacy guidance,
and then there's also the reasonable steps guidance
that's just been, uh, released.
So we're still waiting for, uh, final decision on the scope
of services and on the, um, uh, on the privacy guidance.
Um, and so I think, you know, there's still a lot of, uh,
work to be done here, but I do think that the, um,
the law in Australia was rushed through, uh,
in I think less than a week, uh,
and that we didn't have a lot of conversations at the time
around, you know, what we do do around age assurance.
Uh, you know, we just launched Teen Accounts in Australia in
September, uh, 2024,
and the law, uh, was rushed through, um, shortly after that.
So I think there's still a lot of more conversations
that can be had around sort of the industry approach
to age assurance and, um,
and o obviously a lot of the very voluminous findings
of the age assurance technology trial report.
Hmm. Doesn't give much confidence then Phil, Phil Rafford
Would meta, um, release the code of your algorithm so
that it can be analyzed and discussed publicly.
Well, that's sort of what we've tried to do
with the release of the systems cards.
Um, you know, there's been a number of suggestions around,
um, over similar vein over the years,
but it's, I think the challenge is there's sort
of no one code
and there's, you know, there's tweaks
to the algorithm all the time.
'cause you know, in some respects we are trying to fort,
you know, malicious actors in other respects
where there's new, um, updates that are being, uh, released.
So, uh, we have,
and again, it sounds like it might be helpful
to the committee if I send through a link
to these systems cards, we have tried
to provide transparency, you know, sort of at the sort
of system level around the, the large number
of different signals that we take into account when, um,
deciding what type of content to provide.
And then we've also tried to, um, provide guidance in terms
of the policy decisions
that we make in both our content distribution guidelines
and our recommendation guidelines,
and then at the user level so people understand, well,
why am I seeing this particular piece of content
and what can I do to control
that experience if it's not something
that is relevant to someone.
So the system cards are, are,
are you saying they're effectively the code?
No, it provided a detailed understanding of
how the algorithm works at any point in time. Well, it's
Not, I wouldn't say it's a code,
but it is designed to provide insights into what, uh,
what the inputs are
to the algorithm in making a decision about the types
of content that people see.
Okay. Okay. Um, Mia, I appreciate that
Meta is doing a range of things in its view
to address some of these issues.
I don't know how many of the
inquiries submissions you've listened to,
but I've sat through, uh, all of them
and it's very clear that there is a significant challenge
that, uh, parents, that organizations,
that schools are concerned about the impacts
of online harm here in New Zealand.
And I'm sure you're experiencing this in other countries
around the world, and there's been a number
of legislative changes as you've referenced.
At what point does meta go, we need
to do significantly more than we are in order
to solve the underlying problem.
So I think over the years we have been
increasing the work that we do do.
I mean, when you think back to the very early days of meta,
there was a much simpler content policy,
and it was primarily user reporting.
If you look at our transparency reports now, uh, you know,
with something like fake accounts, 99.8% of those are things
that we find before anyone reports them to us.
Uh, and in terms of, you know, how our policies are enforced
and the transparency that we've
provided, we've continued to update them.
And then with the rollout
of teen accounts now being concluded, um,
globally on Instagram and starting on Facebook
and Messenger, um, again, we're hopeful
that people will start to see that there've been, you know,
sort of, it's been a gradual, uh, increase,
but hopefully, um, parents can start to feel the reassurance
that their concerns are being addressed.
And also that there's increased conversations
that are happening, um, intergenerational conversations
around some of these issues.
So for our part, I mean,
obviously young people use a large number of different apps
and, you know, there's gaming platforms,
messaging platforms, et cetera.
Um, so, you know, we continue to press, um, to make sure
that we are doing our part,
but also for industry-wide solutions so
that our parents can feel that the digital industry
as a whole is, is committing to a standard for them.
So I hear that, and I, I hear
what you're saying on in terms of incremental improvement,
but if I take Vanessa's point about the infinite scrolling,
and I see it in friends
and our own house in the community, we've heard it, uh,
through these submissions on a daily basis, at
what point does Meta go, this approach isn't working,
and we need to go back maybe to the drawing board
and say, how do we achieve these, uh, positive benefits
of online social engagement,
but actually much more seriously
and directly help solve the problems that we've heard about,
uh, through this inquiry?
Well, I think with, in relation to, you know, sort
of the algorithmic delivery of content, uh, you know,
we have adopted, uh, a range
of different approaches designed to address those, um,
people's concerns about not understanding why they're seeing
particular pieces of content through policies, um,
and through, uh, enforcement of those,
and then transparency around them,
and then giving tools directly into people's hands.
And that's another feature of the teen accounts is
around these time management tools.
So if people feel that they need additional, uh, controls,
uh, in terms of managing their daily use of our apps, uh,
then we've tried to set those up so
that they're much easier to use.
I'll give a final question to Vanessa. We,
Uh, thank you. And the,
um, transparency center number three on the, um,
on this, um, card is, um,
make predictions that would meta make the AI systems
and the models it uses the inputs, the, um, assumptions
and the, um, the, um,
essentially the predictive model available for scrutiny, um,
by a monitoring agency or academic scrutiny.
Uh, sorry, are you quoting from the transparency Henry,
or are you just asking on a principal basis?
Yes. Um, no, I'm reading off the, um,
number three on the Transparency Center, looking at
how fact track Facebook reels work, um, right.
And saying that AI system uses models
that makes predictions.
Well, models are based on mathematical assumptions
and, um, prediction models that, um,
are based on mathematical, um, calculations that have input,
um, amounts of data would meta make the, um,
the raw mathematical, um,
and input data available for scrutiny via, um,
either a monitoring agency or, uh, academic research.
Um, well, with respect to academic research,
there is the meta content
and API library where researchers can get access to
that in order to be able to continue to undertake research.
But that won't necessarily be the models or,
or the Yeah, that's why
I'm asking.
And typically when we access
To the models, because that's what the, of course, that's
what runs it.
So would they allow access to the models?
Yeah, sorry. And let me get to that question.
Um, typically when we've engaged with these types
of questions, um, over the years
with different policy makers
and regulators, um, it hasn't, we haven't been able
to identify ways in which that would be technically feasible
or meaningful in a way
that would sort of move things forward.
And that's why we've adopted the different approaches
that we have to try to provide, um,
the algorithmic transparency and controls.
So, no, Thank you, um, Mia appreciate,
uh, the time you've given us this afternoon.
Um, and I appreciate the input you've had into the inquiry.
Thank you so much, and all the best with the rest
of the, um, hearing. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. That's no, um, I'm now gonna invite
Ella, um, woods Joyce from TikTok, um, onto the Zoom,
um, for 20 minutes please.
This one, these Are their transparency cards, supposed
system transparency.
Um, Ella, apparently you've just gotta turn your camera on
please so that we can, uh, see that you are there.
We, there we go. Your apologies there,
chair. I'm here. Thank you.
No worries. Hi, Ella, we've got 20 minutes
for you this afternoon, including some time for questions.
Apologies that we're starting a little late.
Hopefully you'll be able to indulge us, um, around timing.
I'll hand over you to start
and then if you can allow some time for questions.
Yeah, of course. And thank you very
much, chair and the committee.
I'm Ella Woods Joyce, and I'm TikTok Australia.
And New Zealand's public policy lead
with a focus on content and safety.
I have a couple of minutes worth of remarks
before we get to questions, if that That's okay.
Uh, so as members of the committee are aware,
TikTok is a global entertainment platform.
We have more than a billion users around the world,
uh, each and every year.
We are investing approximately 3.4 billion New Zealand
dollars into the teams, the tools
and the technology that enforce our very strict
community guidelines.
We do this with an aim of making TikTok one
of the safest online spaces.
Teens in particular, we know need different things in terms
of their safety and wellbeing.
And some of the ways that we particularly look
after our teens include an age appropriate design
and experience for those teenagers.
What that practically means is a few examples.
If you're under the age of 16, your account is going
to be set to private by default.
That means that the content
that you create is also ineligible to be recommended
through the for you feed, which is
how most people are watching their videos.
Uh, you're also prevented from doing things like
sending direct messages.
Uh, we also won't notify you, send you notifications
after certain hours
because we know that as an under 16-year-old,
you do need different support, uh, when you are online.
Um, if you're under 18, slightly older teen,
there are a different graduated system of controls
to support your online wellbeing.
It does mean that you have a default 60 minute time
limit on your accounts.
And it also means amongst other things
that you are ineligible to, to go live, for example, um,
we do acknowledge that much
of the debate is on blunt age bands at the moment,
but many hundreds of experts, including those
that your committee has heard from today and in hearings
before today, they have warned that blunt bans don't work.
That they may in fact send children
and young people to places on the internet
that don't have the safety, the teams
and the tools that large platforms like ours do have
to keep those children and young people safe.
Uh, so when we are thinking about the internet,
we really need to acknowledge that it is here to stay.
Um, but I say this from a place of empathy.
I, I'm a mom, I have two young children myself.
I do really understand that there are challenges, um,
but also significant opportunities for our children
and young people to being online and to do so safely.
Uh, to borrow a phrase from the Australian eSafety
Commissioner, um, we can't fence off the ocean.
We do need to teach our children
to swim in a digital environment,
and we need to invest in digital literacy.
And I've seen some great
campaigns from New Zealand, for example.
So I very much encouraging of those sorts of initiatives to,
to really make sure the whole community understands those
risks and opportunity
and can make those good decisions for themselves.
When we're speaking about regulation,
I think it's really critically important
that we put forward sensible evidence-based legislation
that looks to lift safety standards.
Yes, of course, for our teams, but for all internet users
and across types of services that any one
of us can interact with on a daily basis.
So with that, thank you very much to the committee
for having me, and I look forward to taking your questions.
Okay. Who we'd like to start? Ruben Davidson.
Thank you chair. And,
and thank you Ella for taking us through that.
Um, up top you talked about the aim of TikTok
to be in a safe online space, um, that's different
to being a safe online space.
How far away from being a safe online space are you?
Well, I think the vast majority of our users come
to TikTok and we continue to grow our community
because our community is having a safe
and entertaining experience.
Um, in our submission, you'll have seen some
of our enforcement statistics, including some of the content
and the accounts that we've removed from New Zealand market
in the last, um, little while.
So I, I think from it's important to speak to
how effective our systems are.
So we've re removed around 99% of content
that's violated our community guidelines within
the first 24 hours.
But I say that, um, in with full acknowledgement
that there is always more work to be done.
There are always investments that we need to continue
to make, not just in our technology and our teams,
but our policies to make sure that people continue
to have a safe experience, that they can continue
to enjoy our platform and thrive.
Sure. And just to suck off that, if I may cheer mm-hmm.
Um, have you seen that there was a recent piece
of reporting in New Zealand carried by Radio New Zealand?
Yes. Where four profiles were created on TikTok, all
of which would've been, I believe were created
for 13-year-old profiles.
And then the content that they were served up over a period
of a number of weeks was tracked and, and, um, aggregated.
So you could see the kinds of themes
and content that was being shared.
Mm-hmm. Um, that seems quite contradictory to me
to the, um, approach
and safeguards that you are talking about having in place
to prevent that content being seen and shared.
Oh, um, what I'd say is, I, I, yes, I have seen
that story, um,
and I do wanna acknowledge that it wasn't, uh,
necessarily a particularly scientific story.
Um, but I, I I also wanna say
that we were the only platform acknowledged
and, and examined.
So I'd like to put that in a little bit of context,
but I also think it's critically important to remember that
by the author's own acknowledgement they looked for,
but could not find overtly harmful content on our platform.
And in fact, when they were searching for it, uh,
not only did they not find it, they were also redirected
to services that offered support, for example.
So in that sense, it absolutely shows
that our systems are working well
and as intended, acknowledging
that there's always more work to be done.
The other thing I just wanna note about that New Zealand,
uh, RNZ story was that, um, they highlighted some
of the really excellent things that happen in our community,
on our platform in New Zealand, the great, uh, stories
of culture and, um, creation that happen amongst the, um,
the New Zealand community.
And those stories are being shared with the globe.
So I, I think while we talk about online safety,
that's absolutely critically important,
but we shouldn't forget that the online environment does
also afford significant benefits, including
that storytelling, that cultural learning that is happening
that the RNZ story highlights as well.
Just, sorry, one point of clarification. No,
No, sorry, sorry. Oh,
quick clarification,
Mr. Clarification. You,
you referenced context at the top
of your answer around TikTok being the only platform
examined in that story.
Just for the record, are you clarifying that
TikTok potentially operates the same
as any other social media platform,
maybe better than other social media platforms?
What's the point of your, of your comment?
I, I think I'm just highlighting that, um, this was a,
a small sample story, um,
that wasn't looking at the entire spectrum
of online services that was focused on us.
Um, but again, I, I do wanna acknowledge we, uh,
we are always striving to do better.
It's not to, um, to, to reflect negatively on anyone at all.
Okay. Palm,
Very quick sub to Ian's Christian, as, do you have any,
uh, measurable, uh, proof to back your claim of safety?
Well, uh, we have put a lot, a range
of details in our submission, including in terms
of the enforcement efficacy of our policies in New Zealand.
Um, so for example, we've removed, uh,
375,000 accounts from New Zealand
that breached our community guidelines since the
beginning of 2023.
Um, there are a range of other data points that I can speak
to, including that efficacy of removal of content
that breaches our guidelines within the first 24 hours.
So I'm very happy to provide that sort of data
and we do report it regularly in our
transparency reports as well.
So given the concerns, uh,
obviously you're doing some work, um, behind the scenes
to make sure the platform is safe, but it's not.
So what kind of improvements are you making in that regard?
So you'll see the very comprehensive structure that we put
around our teen accounts, for example.
Um, they are age appropriate experiences
that we've in led the industry on,
and that was put in place some years ago.
So that's an example of how we iterate our product
consistently and continually to make investments
to keep our community safe so that work doesn't stop.
Um, that work is iterative and ongoing.
I see that across the course of my day to day
and wherever we have improvements, um, we always seek
to make them known to our community
so they can take advantage of those tools
and improvements to keep the platform safe.
Ella, on your point about the 280,000 accounts
that you've removed that you suspect have been under 13?
Yes. A couple of weeks back,
I spent a day visiting primary schools across my electorate,
uh, in every classroom with the principals agreement.
I asked the students what social media platforms they're
on in every classroom.
These are primary schools,
so they're all under the age of 13.
Uh, there were students
who were on TikTok in the senior classes.
So the years are four and five, particularly.
How quickly do you
imagine those accounts will be picked up and removed?
And the, the second question to that is,
what do you consider acceptable for
how long those students are using your platform for
before, uh, TikTok picks up
that they are under the age of 13?
Because from my reading of it through that day, that,
that they'd been on there for a, a,
a considerable period of time.
It wasn't like they'd signed up on that day.
Sure. Well, safety is absolutely a top priority for us,
and one of the core pillars of
that safety work is making sure that people are the age
that they need to be to use, um, to use our platform.
You've referenced the, uh, 280,000 accounts
that we have removed from New Zealand where we suspected
that user was under the age of 13.
We take those decisions, um, through specialist teams
that are trained to identify
and remove, uh, users
that are not the age that they need to be.
But again, I just wanna be very clear that
that work is ongoing.
We are always investing to improve that process, uh,
to make sure that we keep getting better
and better at doing that.
Um, so I, I don't think
that I can specify a particular time,
but of course we want to make sure
that we identify those accounts as quickly as possible,
take them down, and ensure that, um, as best we can,
that there are not users that are under the age
of 13 on TikTok.
So given the sort of experience that myself
and my colleagues have had going into schools
and getting that feedback
and the submissions we've had to the inquiry,
would you agree that a step change is needed in the way
TikTok is managing those accounts so
that there is significantly less under 13 year olds, uh,
evidenced as, as utilizing your platform?
So I would say that age assurance is obviously important
work for all platforms, whether it's, um, social media,
whether it's gaming or otherwise,
because all of us have an interest in making sure that, uh,
people are the age they need to be
to safely use a, a product.
Um, so I, I think there is always also a tension between
how much information you collect about someone
and, um, that balance with ensuring that their, their,
their, so their privacy on one hand is very well protected,
but also that their safety is, is looked after as well.
So we walk that line, um, very closely.
We make sure that we are removing accounts, we think
to be under 13, but again, that work isn't going to stop.
Um, we also allow users to report accounts
where they suspect that the user is under 13.
So in a school environment, we, we work
with government agencies to, um, to take reports
to enforce our guidelines.
We do the same with other entities across government,
including NetSafe and others,
but we also empower general users to report accounts
where they think the user is under the age and the like.
So there are a range of ways we do this work
and we'll keep doing that work and keep making improvements.
Okay. Vanessa, Winnick,
Oh, thank you very much.
Um, and thanks for, um, taking us through that.
Um, there's a couple of features
that I'm quite interested in, um, specifically
around the algorithm and the for use, uh, for you page.
Um, personalized recommendations, um, through the, um,
RNZ highlighting, um, how this worked.
There did seem to be, um, some pretty, um, stereotypical,
um, kind of ways
that people ended up going down various different, um,
pathways, uh, that would indicate there's potentially some
of those underlying models and predictions
and assumptions could be, um, have some bias in them.
Would TikTok allow, um, access for a monitoring agency
or a, um,
or academics
to see the underlying mathematical prediction models
that are used for the four used page? Um, predictions.
So I, I firstly say
that the recommendation system is designed to,
to provide our community with a personalized and relevant
and entertaining experience.
And, and safety is at its core with that, with respect
to transparency, we have a number of transparency
and accountability centers around the globe,
including in our Singapore office, where we offer, um, some,
some opportunity to engage
with the recommendation system in a structured environment.
So we do provide some access
and controls with respect to transparency,
and we also, uh, offer a research API.
So, um, those are ways that are already in place to, um,
to ensure that there's some opportunity to,
to test our systems in a, a more robust and rigorous way.
So does that include access to the underlying assumptions
and, um, statistical mathematical models that are used?
There is some access, um,
that is available for researchers.
I'm very happy to go away
and provide some more specificity to the committee around
what that more practically looks like,
but I don't have full details with me at the moment.
Thank you. Ella. Will, um, follow up on that point, um,
uh, Phil Twyford,
Ella, you mentioned, um, earlier that you have kids Yes.
If they are between the ages of 13
and 16, do you allow them unrestricted access to
TikTok on their phones?
And if they are, uh, uh, if they're not, would you?
So my children are not, um, they are not of an age
where they're allowed to use TikTok.
Um, but I still very much, uh,
school holidays in Australia at the moment, for example,
I'm very empathetic to parents who are, um,
potentially struggling with their children, really wanting
to play games and streaming services endlessly.
So I, we, like many families, we have a lot of rules.
Um, we try to have very open conversations about
what those rules look like with what we expect
of our children and what we're we are offering
to support them when they want to use online services.
Um, when they do turn 13, I would allow them to use TikTok.
But, um, that acknowledges that we have tools
and Strat systems in place that are responsive to the needs
of a 13-year-old,
which is discreetly separate from the needs
of an 18-year-old, including a 60 minute default time
setting, including the ability to pair with a family member,
uh, so that they can have those, uh, conversations
with family about what online, uh, time should look like.
Um, I think that's really critically important
and it acknowledges that all families are different,
all families have different needs
and that they wanna to manage that time in a different way.
Are those, excuse me, are those youth settings
for 13 to 16?
Are they mandatory or are they optional? Currently
There are many that are mandatory, yes.
So, um, privacy by default, if you're under the age
of 16 is mandatory.
Uh, the 60 minute, uh, screen time limit
for under 18 is there for all users.
Uh, and those sorts of things are
Mandatory or optional.
Yes, that's right. They're there. Um,
and if you wanted to make further tightening of,
of settings, you can do that, um, in concert with a parent
or carer through the family pairing tool.
Thank you. You're on mute rub.
Sorry. I know some of you prefer that.
Um, the, you talked about communities,
your community standards Yes.
And, and different,
and you also talked when I gave the example of the coverage
of the TikTok experiment, want of a better word.
So it's not a level playing field
for social media platforms currently,
because you all have your own community standards, right?
Or, and, and that's the rules that you choose to operate by.
And, um, and some will be stricter or deeper
or more restrictive than others.
So it's unlikely that you're gonna collaborate
with other social media platforms owned by other companies
on your community standards.
You're correct that we all keep our own rules
and enforce to our own standards.
And, and TikTok does hold a very high bar.
There are ways that we will collaborate with other platforms
through, um, third party entities like Tech
Against Terrorism, for example.
So, um, there are ways and means of doing that.
I, I know in New Zealand, um, many
of the major platforms are signatories
to the code, for example.
Um, so there, there are ways that we do
work at least tangentially together.
Yeah. So, so a a another way for you
to work together would be for New Zealand
to have a regulator, and then they would set a level playing
field for all social media platforms operating in this
country, and you could all play by one set of rules.
Well, I think certainly a standard
that everyone can aspire to, regardless of the type
of platform or service that they operate, um, that is a,
a safety standard that the New Zealand community is
comfortable with is, um, is a, a place to start.
And I think that doing
that on an evidentiary basis is, is a wise move.
Um, but we, we all have our own independent interactions
with our regulators in the countries where we're operating.
Sure. But if we had a regulator in place, what,
what I hear you are saying is that, um,
TikTok would be happy to work
with them on the regulations that they put in place
Of, of course, just as we work with NetSafe, just
as we work with DIA, just as we work
with law enforcement in New Zealand already.
Okay. JI Palmer. Yep.
So how long does it take for you
to investigate any complaint, uh,
regarding child safety on your platform
and basically investigate
and take action if there is any
timeframe you could provide us?
Uh, let me get the specifics of
how quickly we would turn those things around for,
but can I just say that, um,
child safety in particular is a very high priority for us.
We, um, collaborate with institutions like, uh,
law enforcement in New Zealand.
I know that you heard from the International Center
for Missing and Exploited Children today.
We work very closely with them to,
we take a zero tolerance approach, um, to, to content
and behaviors that threaten children and young people.
Yeah. But so just keen to understand.
So can you provide that information later on please?
Yes, I'm happy to. And also,
If you could include the number of complaints, uh,
on average per year.
Sure. How many investigations have been completed
and the average time taken to complete those investigations.
I'm happy to provide as much information as I can.
Thank you. Thanks, Ella.
If the committee was to go down the route of, uh,
recommending the same as Australia,
formalized age verification, what are the one or two
or three learnings you would recommend we take on board
within the constraint of saying that has
to, that's happening?
What would be the, the learnings, uh,
you think New Zealand could take on board
to make it more effective?
Um, in its implementation?
Do you mean specifically with relation to age assurance?
Yes. Jurisdiction. Yeah.
Look, I mean, I think, um, we are still going
through the implementation process in Australia, so, um, I I
suggest that you, um, do take some time to see
what happens in Australia to make sure
that you can learn from any, um, bumps in the road
that might happen as we're working towards December 10.
Um, so certainly in that space, I would, uh, just encourage
learning from other jurisdictions.
I, I don't have a specific example to point to yet.
Um, but, uh, at TikTok age assurance is a very high priority
and you've heard those numbers around the strict enforcement
that we take and, and our continued investment in, um,
getting better and better at doing those processes.
Okay. Final question from Ruben. Sure.
Thank you chair.
Um, and thank you a for your answers today.
You talked about there being, um, mandatory features,
mandatory safety features for 13 to 16 year olds.
Yes. And you, you said that there are many
that are mandatory, which would apply
that there are some that are optional.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and potentially some that are manda optional
for people over the age of 16 as well.
And I've just had to flick back through your, um,
submission just to see if it's in there, but it's not.
I'm just wondering whether you can provide us with a table
that details each of those features which are mandatory
and which are optional for 13 to 16 year olds
and for over 16 year olds, just so we can get a better sense
of, um, how much, what the options are
for people in on TikTok.
Yeah, AB absolutely, and I can understand, um,
because there are more than 50 specific features designed
to keep teens specifically safe.
So I'm happy to try to simplify it
and break it down for the committee as well.
Cool. Thank you, Ella.
Um, appreciate the time you've given us this afternoon.
Uh, thank you. And yeah, look forward
to the further information post, uh, this hearing today.
Of course. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Bye.
Um, members, we are now moving to Laura, uh, on Zoom
with her, uh, submission as well.
Laura's just joining now. Okay.
Laura should know the drill well,
we'll be timing a, there she is.
Hi Laura. Um, we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions over to you.
Cool. Um, well thank you Mr.
Chair, and, um, thank you select committee members.
I know you've had an awfully long day of hearings, um,
and this is probably getting a bit hangry,
so I'm gonna keep it, uh, nice and brief for you
and if you've got any questions far away.
Um, but before I do that, I just wanna
see if we can go back a little bit in time for some
of us a little bit longer than others,
but just think about what it was like to be a teenager,
particularly in those formation years.
I see Tom Ruthford, you're online, so maybe not so long ago.
Um, but for the rest of us it's just,
just remember what that was like.
Um, you know, you're going through all the pub I'm trying,
you're, you're essentially in the, um, that kind
of awkward phase of your life, right?
And, and we know how troublesome that can be.
But I just want you guys to imagine, um,
if you're a young teenage girl, 13, 14, 15, 16,
and you wake up in the morning, um, you arrive at school
to find that on the school journey, um, a bunch
of school kids, your peers have been airdropped
a naked image of you.
Um, but this image isn't actually you, it is
not even something that you'd be doing.
You've been put into a deep fake nude.
And it's not just removing clothes,
it's actually something really degrading.
So I want you guys to think about how
that would actually feel.
And this isn't actually something
that I'm just talking about hypothetically.
This is actually something that is happening
and it's something that people are telling me is happening,
which is really scary.
Um, you've all read my submission, so you know
that I have a member's bill in the tin currently about this.
And you know that I'm here to speak about this issue.
I know that the committee has been hearing from all kinds
of different, um, social media providers
and tech companies, et cetera.
But I want to talk to you about a niche, um, a niche thing
that is happening here in New Zealand.
And that is around deep faking.
It's particularly explicit, deep faking,
and a lot of it is happening with our young people.
Um, and actually the stats from overseas actually show
that it's mostly young women.
So it's like 95 to 98% are young females,
which is really scary, uh, that has been happening.
Um, and order to find out how hard it was to do,
I decided to do it myself.
And it took less than five minutes to make.
And it was basically using readily available technology.
Um, you could find a website once you take your safe filter
off your phone, you type in deepfake nude,
and there is hundreds of sites that pop up.
Um, you don't need an account for most of them.
You don't need to pay for most of them.
If you wanna get high quality, you might wanna pay for them,
but you don't have to pay
and you just have to click often a verification that says,
I'm over 18 and, um, I've got permission
to use this person's image.
Um, it was really easy to do and really scary.
That's one part of it.
The second part of it is
that this is not actually explicitly illegal in our country,
which I think is really sad and really scary
because we know that technology, particularly ai, um,
has been revolution revolutionary the way
that we actually live.
And for most part it's really cool.
Like I know that I use AI in my everyday life,
and most of us probably do.
And, and for that is kind of amazing.
But what we don't realize is
that young people have found a way to use this technology
because it has been available
to them in order to abuse each other.
Um, Vaughn Coit, the president
of the Secondary Principals Association,
said it's not a low level and simple as people.
The perpetrator might think it's not cheap entertainment.
It is a life damaging work.
Um, Catherine Abel Patterson from Netspace NetSafe was
quoted as saying every single day, we answer the phone
and we have suicidal people on the other end
because stuff like this has been sent
to them and it's just not them.
While researching for this bill,
and since I've had this bill in the member's 10,
I've had heaps of stories coming through,
and they're mostly all female,
but some of them are actually from concerned Dads partners,
um, that this is happening to,
and they're really concerned about the lack of support,
the lack of awareness in New Zealand,
and the lack of accountability.
A harmful Digital Communications act is
around 10 years old now, and it's just not fit for purpose.
We know that it needs a big overhaul,
and we know that we need to do more in the space
around potentially regulating,
but what we could do is actually go
for something really simple right now
that would actually make a difference.
And that is to say that actually deep faking, um,
people without their consent into pornography is illegal.
And I've really urged the committee
to look at either supporting my member's bill or coming in
and talking to me about what it would take to support it
or what you'd like to see.
Um, and I really hope that the committee is considering
all the other kind of options around
what we could do in this space.
So I'm ready to take some questions
and I'll just leave that, leave you with that.
Thanks, Laura. Thank you, Laura.
So very keen to understand.
Um, I know that you've been talking to, uh, students,
young people, parents
and teachers, uh, keen to understand what kind of response
or feedback are you getting about this issue
because it's such a, a serious issue
and also, uh, keen to understand.
Do you think people are really aware
that this could be happening?
Are you finding that some people might not be even aware
that this, this AI could be misused to that extent?
Yeah, look, I, I think I'd started hearing about it, um,
when I first became a member of Parliament
and I was going out, um, talking
to principals from schools mostly about attendance.
And nearly every time we were talking about it,
it would pop up, what are you doing about ai?
What are you doing about deep faking?
Um, this is happening to kids here at school?
Um, and it that led on to other conversations about, um,
you know, what are the police doing?
And, and we went down the track of realizing that actually
because our legislation doesn't explicitly say, um,
deep fake or synthetic images is a form
of potential abuse when making this content, it meant
that it's really hard to get a conviction.
Not impossible, but as far as I'm aware,
there hasn't been any, any
yet under the current legislation.
But it makes it hard. So it means
that police don't actually do a lot about it.
Um, it means there's no victim support.
So these schools don't get the victim support
that they would normally get.
Um, and it means that there's not
education going on about this.
Um, and I think the education piece is possibly one
of the most important things we need.
Um, this, this particular issue is global.
It's not just New Zealand.
We're seeing it all around the world.
I know that, uh, the reports of my members Bill,
have gone all through the likes of the uk, India, Australia,
um, and a lot of these countries themselves, um, uh, Korea,
South Korea, have put in measures, um,
and made sure that this is actually a criminal, um,
a a criminal offense to do this kind of horrible abuse
and bullying to other people.
Thank you. Thank you. Any other questions for Laura?
I think, Laura, you've made your point pretty clear.
Um, I think we've read the all read the members bill, um,
and, uh, considering the issue as part of the Yeah.
Inquiry. All done. Cool.
Well, thank you guys. Enjoy the rest of your evening.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Um, members, we're gonna move into private now.
Uh, we not the other one, two, no.